Next Sunday we all went to church, about three mile, everybody a-horseback.
The men took their guns along, so did Buck, and kept them between their knees
or stood them handy against the wall. The Shepherdsons done the same. It was
pretty ornery preaching—all about brotherly love, and such-like tiresomeness;
but everybody said it was a good sermon, and they all talked it over going home,
and had such a powerful lot to say about faith and good works and free grace and
preforeordestination, and I don’t know what all, that it did seem to me to be one
of the roughest Sundays I had run across yet.
About an hour after dinner everybody was dozing around, some in their chairs
and some in their rooms, and it got to be pretty dull. Buck and a dog was
stretched out on the grass in the sun sound asleep. I went up to our room, and
judged I would take a nap myself. I found that sweet Miss Sophia standing in
her door, which was next to ours, and she took me in her room and shut the door
very soft, and asked me if I liked her, and I said I did; and she asked me if I
would do something for her and not tell anybody, and I said I would. Then she
said she’d forgot her Testament, and left it in the seat at church between two
other books, and would I slip out quiet and go there and fetch it to her, and not
say nothing to nobody. I said I would. So I slid out and slipped off up the road,
and there warn’t anybody at the church, except maybe a hog or two, for there
warn’t any lock on the door, and hogs likes a puncheon floor in summer-time
because it’s cool. If you notice, most folks don’t go to church only when they’ve
got to; but a hog is different.
c18-149.jpg (54K)
Says I to myself, something’s up; it ain’t natural for a girl to be in such a
sweat about a Testament. So I give it a shake, and out drops a little piece of
paper with “HALF-PAST TWO” wrote on it with a pencil. I ransacked it, but
couldn’t find anything else. I couldn’t make anything out of that, so I put the
paper in the book again, and when I got home and upstairs there was Miss
Sophia in her door waiting for me. She pulled me in and shut the door; then she
looked in the Testament till she found the paper, and as soon as she read it she
looked glad; and before a body could think she grabbed me and give me a
squeeze, and said I was the best boy in the world, and not to tell anybody. She
was mighty red in the face for a minute, and her eyes lighted up, and it made her
powerful pretty. I was a good deal astonished, but when I got my breath I asked
her what the paper was about, and she asked me if I had read it, and I said no,
and she asked me if I could read writing, and I told her “no, only coarse-hand,”
and then she said the paper warn’t anything but a book-mark to keep her place,
and I might go and play now.
I went off down to the river, studying over this thing, and pretty soon I noticed
that my nigger was following along behind. When we was out of sight of the
house he looked back and around a second, and then comes a-running, and says:
“Mars Jawge, if you’ll come down into de swamp I’ll show you a whole stack
o’ water-moccasins.”
Thinks I, that’s mighty curious; he said that yesterday. He oughter know a
body don’t love water-moccasins enough to go around hunting for them. What is
he up to, anyway? So I says:
“All right; trot ahead.”
I followed a half a mile; then he struck out over the swamp, and waded ankle
deep as much as another half-mile. We come to a little flat piece of land which
was dry and very thick with trees and bushes and vines, and he says:
“You shove right in dah jist a few steps, Mars Jawge; dah’s whah dey is. I’s
seed ’m befo’; I don’t k’yer to see ’em no mo’.”
Then he slopped right along and went away, and pretty soon the trees hid him.
I poked into the place a-ways and come to a little open patch as big as a
bedroom all hung around with vines, and found a man laying there asleep—and,
by jings, it was my old Jim!
I waked him up, and I reckoned it was going to be a grand surprise to him to
see me again, but it warn’t. He nearly cried he was so glad, but he warn’t
surprised. Said he swum along behind me that night, and heard me yell every
time, but dasn’t answer, because he didn’t want nobody to pick him up and take
him into slavery again. Says he:
“I got hurt a little, en couldn’t swim fas’, so I wuz a considable ways behine
you towards de las’; when you landed I reck’ned I could ketch up wid you on de
lan’ ’dout havin’ to shout at you, but when I see dat house I begin to go slow. I
’uz off too fur to hear what dey say to you—I wuz ’fraid o’ de dogs; but when it
’uz all quiet agin I knowed you’s in de house, so I struck out for de woods to
wait for day. Early in de mawnin’ some er de niggers come along, gwyne to de
fields, en dey tuk me en showed me dis place, whah de dogs can’t track me on
accounts o’ de water, en dey brings me truck to eat every night, en tells me how
you’s a-gitt’n along.”
“Why didn’t you tell my Jack to fetch me here sooner, Jim?”
“Well, ’twarn’t no use to ’sturb you, Huck, tell we could do sumfn—but we’s
all right now. I ben a-buyin’ pots en pans en vittles, as I got a chanst, en apatchin’ up de raf’ nights when—”
“What raft, Jim?”
“Our ole raf’.”
“You mean to say our old raft warn’t smashed all to flinders?”
“No, she warn’t. She was tore up a good deal—one en’ of her was; but dey
warn’t no great harm done, on’y our traps was mos’ all los’. Ef we hadn’ dive’
so deep en swum so fur under water, en de night hadn’ ben so dark, en we warn’t
so sk’yerd, en ben sich punkin-heads, as de sayin’ is, we’d a seed de raf’. But
it’s jis’ as well we didn’t, ’kase now she’s all fixed up agin mos’ as good as new,
en we’s got a new lot o’stuff, in de place o’ what ’uz los’.”
“Why, how did you get hold of the raft again, Jim—did you catch her?”
“How I gwyne to ketch her en I out in de woods? No; some er de niggers
foun’ her ketched on a snag along heah in de ben’, en dey hid her in a crick
’mongst de willows, en dey wuz so much jawin’ ’bout which un ’um she b’long
to de mos’ dat I come to heah ’bout it pooty soon, so I ups en settles de trouble
by tellin’ ’um she don’t b’long to none uv um, but to you en me; en I ast ’m if
dey gwyne to grab a young white genlman’s propaty, en git a hid’n for it? Den I
gin ’m ten cents apiece, en dey ’uz mighty well satisfied, en wisht some mo’
raf’s ’ud come along en make ’m rich agin. Dey’s mighty good to me, dese
niggers is, en whatever I wants ’m to do fur me I doan’ have to ast ’m twice,
honey. Dat Jack’s a good nigger, en pooty smart.”
“Yes, he is. He ain’t ever told me you was here; told me to come, and he’d
show me a lot of water-moccasins. If anything happens he ain’t mixed up in it.
He can say he never seen us together, and it ’ll be the truth.”
I don’t want to talk much about the next day. I reckon I’ll cut it pretty short. I
waked up about dawn, and was a-going to turn over and go to sleep again when I
noticed how still it was—didn’t seem to be anybody stirring. That warn’t usual.
Next I noticed that Buck was up and gone. Well, I gets up, a-wondering, and
goes down stairs—nobody around; everything as still as a mouse. Just the same
outside. Thinks I, what does it mean? Down by the wood-pile I comes across
my Jack, and says:
“What’s it all about?”
Says he:
“Don’t you know, Mars Jawge?”
“No,” says I, “I don’t.”
“Well, den, Miss Sophia’s run off! ’deed she has. She run off in de night some
time—nobody don’t know jis’ when; run off to get married to dat young Harney
Shepherdson, you know—leastways, so dey ’spec. De fambly foun’ it out ’bout
half an hour ago—maybe a little mo’—en’ I tell you dey warn’t no time los’.
Sich another hurryin’ up guns en hosses you never see! De women folks has
gone for to stir up de relations, en ole Mars Saul en de boys tuck dey guns en
rode up de river road for to try to ketch dat young man en kill him ’fo’ he kin git
acrost de river wid Miss Sophia. I reck’n dey’s gwyne to be mighty rough
times.”
“Buck went off ’thout waking me up.”
“Well, I reck’n he did! Dey warn’t gwyne to mix you up in it. Mars Buck he
loaded up his gun en ’lowed he’s gwyne to fetch home a Shepherdson or bust.
Well, dey’ll be plenty un ’m dah, I reck’n, en you bet you he’ll fetch one ef he
gits a chanst.”
I took up the river road as hard as I could put. By and by I begin to hear guns
a good ways off. When I come in sight of the log store and the woodpile where
the steamboats lands I worked along under the trees and brush till I got to a good
place, and then I clumb up into the forks of a cottonwood that was out of reach,
and watched. There was a wood-rank four foot high a little ways in front of the
tree, and first I was going to hide behind that; but maybe it was luckier I didn’t.
There was four or five men cavorting around on their horses in the open place
before the log store, cussing and yelling, and trying to get at a couple of young
chaps that was behind the wood-rank alongside of the steamboat landing; but
they couldn’t come it. Every time one of them showed himself on the river side
of the woodpile he got shot at. The two boys was squatting back to back behind
the pile, so they could watch both ways.
c18-153.jpg (73K)
By and by the men stopped cavorting around and yelling. They started riding
towards the store; then up gets one of the boys, draws a steady bead over the
wood-rank, and drops one of them out of his saddle. All the men jumped off of
their horses and grabbed the hurt one and started to carry him to the store; and
that minute the two boys started on the run. They got half way to the tree I was
in before the men noticed. Then the men see them, and jumped on their horses
and took out after them. They gained on the boys, but it didn’t do no good, the
boys had too good a start; they got to the woodpile that was in front of my tree,
and slipped in behind it, and so they had the bulge on the men again. One of the
boys was Buck, and the other was a slim young chap about nineteen years old.
The men ripped around awhile, and then rode away. As soon as they was out
of sight I sung out to Buck and told him. He didn’t know what to make of my
voice coming out of the tree at first. He was awful surprised. He told me to
watch out sharp and let him know when the men come in sight again; said they
was up to some devilment or other—wouldn’t be gone long. I wished I was out
of that tree, but I dasn’t come down. Buck begun to cry and rip, and ’lowed that
him and his cousin Joe (that was the other young chap) would make up for this
day yet. He said his father and his two brothers was killed, and two or three of
the enemy. Said the Shepherdsons laid for them in ambush. Buck said his father
and brothers ought to waited for their relations—the Shepherdsons was too
strong for them. I asked him what was become of young Harney and Miss
Sophia. He said they’d got across the river and was safe. I was glad of that; but
the way Buck did take on because he didn’t manage to kill Harney that day he
shot at him—I hain’t ever heard anything like it.
All of a sudden, bang! bang! bang! goes three or four guns—the men had
slipped around through the woods and come in from behind without their horses!
The boys jumped for the river—both of them hurt—and as they swum down the
current the men run along the bank shooting at them and singing out, “Kill them,
kill them!” It made me so sick I most fell out of the tree. I ain’t a-going to tell
all that happened—it would make me sick again if I was to do that. I wished I
hadn’t ever come ashore that night to see such things. I ain’t ever going to get
shut of them—lots of times I dream about them.
I stayed in the tree till it begun to get dark, afraid to come down. Sometimes I
heard guns away off in the woods; and twice I seen little gangs of men gallop
past the log store with guns; so I reckoned the trouble was still a-going on. I was
mighty downhearted; so I made up my mind I wouldn’t ever go anear that house
again, because I reckoned I was to blame, somehow. I judged that that piece of
paper meant that Miss Sophia was to meet Harney somewheres at half-past two
and run off; and I judged I ought to told her father about that paper and the
curious way she acted, and then maybe he would a locked her up, and this awful
mess wouldn’t ever happened.
When I got down out of the tree I crept along down the river bank a piece, and
found the two bodies laying in the edge of the water, and tugged at them till I got
them ashore; then I covered up their faces, and got away as quick as I could. I
cried a little when I was covering up Buck’s face, for he was mighty good to me.
It was just dark now. I never went near the house, but struck through the
woods and made for the swamp. Jim warn’t on his island, so I tramped off in a
hurry for the crick, and crowded through the willows, red-hot to jump aboard
and get out of that awful country. The raft was gone! My souls, but I was
scared! I couldn’t get my breath for most a minute. Then I raised a yell. A voice
not twenty-five foot from me says:
“Good lan’! is dat you, honey? Doan’ make no noise.”
It was Jim’s voice—nothing ever sounded so good before. I run along the
bank a piece and got aboard, and Jim he grabbed me and hugged me, he was so
glad to see me. He says:
“Laws bless you, chile, I ’uz right down sho’ you’s dead agin. Jack’s been
heah; he say he reck’n you’s ben shot, kase you didn’ come home no mo’; so I’s
jes’ dis minute a startin’ de raf’ down towards de mouf er de crick, so’s to be all
ready for to shove out en leave soon as Jack comes agin en tells me for certain
you is dead. Lawsy, I’s mighty glad to git you back again, honey.”
I says:
“All right—that’s mighty good; they won’t find me, and they’ll think I’ve
been killed, and floated down the river—there’s something up there that ’ll help
them think so—so don’t you lose no time, Jim, but just shove off for the big
water as fast as ever you can.”
I never felt easy till the raft was two mile below there and out in the middle of
the Mississippi. Then we hung up our signal lantern, and judged that we was
free and safe once more. I hadn’t had a bite to eat since yesterday, so Jim he got
out some corn-dodgers and buttermilk, and pork and cabbage and greens—there
ain’t nothing in the world so good when it’s cooked right—and whilst I eat my
supper we talked and had a good time. I was powerful glad to get away from the
feuds, and so was Jim to get away from the swamp. We said there warn’t no
home like a raft, after all. Other places do seem so cramped up and smothery,
but a raft don’t. You feel mighty free and easy and comfortable on a raft.
c19-157.jpg (169K)
CHAPTER XIX.
TWO or three days and nights went by; I reckon I might say they swum by,
they slid along so quiet and smooth and lovely. Here is the way we put in the
time. It was a monstrous big river down there—sometimes a mile and a half
wide; we run nights, and laid up and hid daytimes; soon as night was most gone
we stopped navigating and tied up—nearly always in the dead water under a
towhead; and then cut young cottonwoods and willows, and hid the raft with
them. Then we set out the lines. Next we slid into the river and had a swim, so
as to freshen up and cool off; then we set down on the sandy bottom where the
water was about knee deep, and watched the daylight come. Not a sound
anywheres—perfectly still—just like the whole world was asleep, only
sometimes the bullfrogs a-cluttering, maybe. The first thing to see, looking
away over the water, was a kind of dull line—that was the woods on t’other side;
you couldn’t make nothing else out; then a pale place in the sky; then more
paleness spreading around; then the river softened up away off, and warn’t black
any more, but gray; you could see little dark spots drifting along ever so far
away—trading scows, and such things; and long black streaks—rafts; sometimes
you could hear a sweep screaking; or jumbled up voices, it was so still, and
sounds come so far; and by and by you could see a streak on the water which
you know by the look of the streak that there’s a snag there in a swift current
which breaks on it and makes that streak look that way; and you see the mist curl
up off of the water, and the east reddens up, and the river, and you make out a
log-cabin in the edge of the woods, away on the bank on t’other side of the river,
being a woodyard, likely, and piled by them cheats so you can throw a dog
through it anywheres; then the nice breeze springs up, and comes fanning you
from over there, so cool and fresh and sweet to smell on account of the woods
and the flowers; but sometimes not that way, because they’ve left dead fish
laying around, gars and such, and they do get pretty rank; and next you’ve got
the full day, and everything smiling in the sun, and the song-birds just going it!
A little smoke couldn’t be noticed now, so we would take some fish off of the
lines and cook up a hot breakfast. And afterwards we would watch the
lonesomeness of the river, and kind of lazy along, and by and by lazy off to
sleep. Wake up by and by, and look to see what done it, and maybe see a
steamboat coughing along up-stream, so far off towards the other side you
couldn’t tell nothing about her only whether she was a stern-wheel or sidewheel; then for about an hour there wouldn’t be nothing to hear nor nothing to
see—just solid lonesomeness. Next you’d see a raft sliding by, away off yonder,
and maybe a galoot on it chopping, because they’re most always doing it on a
raft; you’d see the axe flash and come down—you don’t hear nothing; you see
that axe go up again, and by the time it’s above the man’s head then you hear the
k’chunk!—it had took all that time to come over the water. So we would put in
the day, lazying around, listening to the stillness. Once there was a thick fog,
and the rafts and things that went by was beating tin pans so the steamboats
wouldn’t run over them. A scow or a raft went by so close we could hear them
talking and cussing and laughing—heard them plain; but we couldn’t see no sign
of them; it made you feel crawly; it was like spirits carrying on that way in the
air. Jim said he believed it was spirits; but I says:
“No; spirits wouldn’t say, ‘Dern the dern fog.’”
Soon as it was night out we shoved; when we got her out to about the middle
we let her alone, and let her float wherever the current wanted her to; then we lit
the pipes, and dangled our legs in the water, and talked about all kinds of things
—we was always naked, day and night, whenever the mosquitoes would let us—
the new clothes Buck’s folks made for me was too good to be comfortable, and
besides I didn’t go much on clothes, nohow.
Sometimes we’d have that whole river all to ourselves for the longest time.
Yonder was the banks and the islands, across the water; and maybe a spark—
which was a candle in a cabin window; and sometimes on the water you could
see a spark or two—on a raft or a scow, you know; and maybe you could hear a
fiddle or a song coming over from one of them crafts. It’s lovely to live on a raft.
We had the sky up there, all speckled with stars, and we used to lay on our
backs and look up at them, and discuss about whether they was made or only just
happened. Jim he allowed they was made, but I allowed they happened; I judged
it would have took too long to make so many. Jim said the moon could a laid
them; well, that looked kind of reasonable, so I didn’t say nothing against it,
because I’ve seen a frog lay most as many, so of course it could be done. We
used to watch the stars that fell, too, and see them streak down. Jim allowed
they’d got spoiled and was hove out of the nest.
Once or twice of a night we would see a steamboat slipping along in the dark,
and now and then she would belch a whole world of sparks up out of her
chimbleys, and they would rain down in the river and look awful pretty; then she
would turn a corner and her lights would wink out and her powwow shut off and
leave the river still again; and by and by her waves would get to us, a long time
after she was gone, and joggle the raft a bit, and after that you wouldn’t hear
nothing for you couldn’t tell how long, except maybe frogs or something.
After midnight the people on shore went to bed, and then for two or three
hours the shores was black—no more sparks in the cabin windows. These
sparks was our clock—the first one that showed again meant morning was
coming, so we hunted a place to hide and tie up right away.
One morning about daybreak I found a canoe and crossed over a chute to the
main shore—it was only two hundred yards—and paddled about a mile up a
crick amongst the cypress woods, to see if I couldn’t get some berries. Just as I
was passing a place where a kind of a cowpath crossed the crick, here comes a
couple of men tearing up the path as tight as they could foot it. I thought I was a
goner, for whenever anybody was after anybody I judged it was me—or maybe
Jim. I was about to dig out from there in a hurry, but they was pretty close to me
then, and sung out and begged me to save their lives—said they hadn’t been
doing nothing, and was being chased for it—said there was men and dogs acoming. They wanted to jump right in, but I says:
c19-160.jpg (84K)
“Don’t you do it. I don’t hear the dogs and horses yet; you’ve got time to
crowd through the brush and get up the crick a little ways; then you take to the
water and wade down to me and get in—that’ll throw the dogs off the scent.”
They done it, and soon as they was aboard I lit out for our towhead, and in
about five or ten minutes we heard the dogs and the men away off, shouting. We
heard them come along towards the crick, but couldn’t see them; they seemed to
stop and fool around a while; then, as we got further and further away all the
time, we couldn’t hardly hear them at all; by the time we had left a mile of
woods behind us and struck the river, everything was quiet, and we paddled over
to the towhead and hid in the cottonwoods and was safe.
One of these fellows was about seventy or upwards, and had a bald head and
very gray whiskers. He had an old battered-up slouch hat on, and a greasy blue
woollen shirt, and ragged old blue jeans britches stuffed into his boot-tops, and
home-knit galluses—no, he only had one. He had an old long-tailed blue jeans
coat with slick brass buttons flung over his arm, and both of them had big, fat,
ratty-looking carpet-bags.
The other fellow was about thirty, and dressed about as ornery. After
breakfast we all laid off and talked, and the first thing that come out was that
these chaps didn’t know one another.
“What got you into trouble?” says the baldhead to t’other chap.
“Well, I’d been selling an article to take the tartar off the teeth—and it does
take it off, too, and generly the enamel along with it—but I stayed about one
night longer than I ought to, and was just in the act of sliding out when I ran
across you on the trail this side of town, and you told me they were coming, and
begged me to help you to get off. So I told you I was expecting trouble myself,
and would scatter out with you. That’s the whole yarn—what’s yourn?
“Well, I’d ben a-running’ a little temperance revival thar ’bout a week, and
was the pet of the women folks, big and little, for I was makin’ it mighty warm
for the rummies, I tell you, and takin’ as much as five or six dollars a night—ten
cents a head, children and niggers free—and business a-growin’ all the time,
when somehow or another a little report got around last night that I had a way of
puttin’ in my time with a private jug on the sly. A nigger rousted me out this
mornin’, and told me the people was getherin’ on the quiet with their dogs and
horses, and they’d be along pretty soon and give me ’bout half an hour’s start,
and then run me down if they could; and if they got me they’d tar and feather me
and ride me on a rail, sure. I didn’t wait for no breakfast—I warn’t hungry.”
“Old man,” said the young one, “I reckon we might double-team it together;
what do you think?”
“I ain’t undisposed. What’s your line—mainly?”
“Jour printer by trade; do a little in patent medicines; theater-actor—tragedy,
you know; take a turn to mesmerism and phrenology when there’s a chance;
teach singing-geography school for a change; sling a lecture sometimes—oh, I
do lots of things—most anything that comes handy, so it ain’t work. What’s
your lay?”
“I’ve done considerble in the doctoring way in my time. Layin’ on o’ hands is
my best holt—for cancer and paralysis, and sich things; and I k’n tell a fortune
pretty good when I’ve got somebody along to find out the facts for me.
Preachin’s my line, too, and workin’ camp-meetin’s, and missionaryin’ around.”
Nobody never said anything for a while; then the young man hove a sigh and
says:
“Alas!”
“What ’re you alassin’ about?” says the bald-head.
“To think I should have lived to be leading such a life, and be degraded down
into such company.” And he begun to wipe the corner of his eye with a rag.
“Dern your skin, ain’t the company good enough for you?” says the baldhead,
pretty pert and uppish.
“Yes, it is good enough for me; it’s as good as I deserve; for who fetched me
so low when I was so high? I did myself. I don’t blame you, gentlemen—far
from it; I don’t blame anybody. I deserve it all. Let the cold world do its worst;
one thing I know—there’s a grave somewhere for me. The world may go on just
as it’s always done, and take everything from me—loved ones, property,
everything; but it can’t take that. Some day I’ll lie down in it and forget it all,
and my poor broken heart will be at rest.” He went on a-wiping.
“Drot your pore broken heart,” says the baldhead; “what are you heaving your
pore broken heart at us f’r? we hain’t done nothing.”
“No, I know you haven’t. I ain’t blaming you, gentlemen. I brought myself
down—yes, I did it myself. It’s right I should suffer—perfectly right—I don’t
make any moan.”
“Brought you down from whar? Whar was you brought down from?”
“Ah, you would not believe me; the world never believes—let it pass—’tis no
matter. The secret of my birth—”
“The secret of your birth! Do you mean to say—”
“Gentlemen,” says the young man, very solemn, “I will reveal it to you, for I
feel I may have confidence in you. By rights I am a duke!”
c19-163.jpg (52K)
Jim’s eyes bugged out when he heard that; and I reckon mine did, too. Then
the baldhead says: "No! you can’t mean it?”
“Yes. My great-grandfather, eldest son of the Duke of Bridgewater, fled to
this country about the end of the last century, to breathe the pure air of freedom;
married here, and died, leaving a son, his own father dying about the same time.
The second son of the late duke seized the titles and estates—the infant real
duke was ignored. I am the lineal descendant of that infant—I am the rightful
Duke of Bridgewater; and here am I, forlorn, torn from my high estate, hunted of
men, despised by the cold world, ragged, worn, heart-broken, and degraded to
the companionship of felons on a raft!”
Jim pitied him ever so much, and so did I. We tried to comfort him, but he
said it warn’t much use, he couldn’t be much comforted; said if we was a mind
to acknowledge him, that would do him more good than most anything else; so
we said we would, if he would tell us how. He said we ought to bow when we
spoke to him, and say “Your Grace,” or “My Lord,” or “Your Lordship”—and he
wouldn’t mind it if we called him plain “Bridgewater,” which, he said, was a
title anyway, and not a name; and one of us ought to wait on him at dinner, and
do any little thing for him he wanted done.
Well, that was all easy, so we done it. All through dinner Jim stood around
and waited on him, and says, “Will yo’ Grace have some o’ dis or some o’ dat?”
and so on, and a body could see it was mighty pleasing to him.
But the old man got pretty silent by and by—didn’t have much to say, and
didn’t look pretty comfortable over all that petting that was going on around that
duke. He seemed to have something on his mind. So, along in the afternoon, he
says:
“Looky here, Bilgewater,” he says, “I’m nation sorry for you, but you ain’t the
only person that’s had troubles like that.”
“No?”
“No you ain’t. You ain’t the only person that’s ben snaked down wrongfully
out’n a high place.”
“Alas!”
“No, you ain’t the only person that’s had a secret of his birth.” And, by jings,
he begins to cry.
“Hold! What do you mean?”
“Bilgewater, kin I trust you?” says the old man, still sort of sobbing.
“To the bitter death!” He took the old man by the hand and squeezed it, and
says, “That secret of your being: speak!”
“Bilgewater, I am the late Dauphin!”
c19-165.jpg (55K)
You bet you, Jim and me stared this time. Then the duke says:
“You are what?”
“Yes, my friend, it is too true—your eyes is lookin’ at this very moment on the
pore disappeared Dauphin, Looy the Seventeen, son of Looy the Sixteen and
Marry Antonette.”
“You! At your age! No! You mean you’re the late Charlemagne; you must
be six or seven hundred years old, at the very least.”
“Trouble has done it, Bilgewater, trouble has done it; trouble has brung these
gray hairs and this premature balditude. Yes, gentlemen, you see before you, in
blue jeans and misery, the wanderin’, exiled, trampled-on, and sufferin’ rightful
King of France.”
Well, he cried and took on so that me and Jim didn’t know hardly what to do,
we was so sorry—and so glad and proud we’d got him with us, too. So we set
in, like we done before with the duke, and tried to comfort him. But he said it
warn’t no use, nothing but to be dead and done with it all could do him any
good; though he said it often made him feel easier and better for a while if
people treated him according to his rights, and got down on one knee to speak to
him, and always called him “Your Majesty,” and waited on him first at meals,
and didn’t set down in his presence till he asked them. So Jim and me set to
majestying him, and doing this and that and t’other for him, and standing up till
he told us we might set down. This done him heaps of good, and so he got
cheerful and comfortable. But the duke kind of soured on him, and didn’t look a
bit satisfied with the way things was going; still, the king acted real friendly
towards him, and said the duke’s great-grandfather and all the other Dukes of
Bilgewater was a good deal thought of by his father, and was allowed to come to
the palace considerable; but the duke stayed huffy a good while, till by and by
the king says:
“Like as not we got to be together a blamed long time on this h-yer raft,
Bilgewater, and so what’s the use o’ your bein’ sour? It ’ll only make things
oncomfortable. It ain’t my fault I warn’t born a duke, it ain’t your fault you
warn’t born a king—so what’s the use to worry? Make the best o’ things the
way you find ’em, says I—that’s my motto. This ain’t no bad thing that we’ve
struck here—plenty grub and an easy life—come, give us your hand, duke, and
le’s all be friends.”
The duke done it, and Jim and me was pretty glad to see it. It took away all
the uncomfortableness and we felt mighty good over it, because it would a been
a miserable business to have any unfriendliness on the raft; for what you want,
above all things, on a raft, is for everybody to be satisfied, and feel right and
kind towards the others.
It didn’t take me long to make up my mind that these liars warn’t no kings nor
dukes at all, but just low-down humbugs and frauds. But I never said nothing,
never let on; kept it to myself; it’s the best way; then you don’t have no quarrels,
and don’t get into no trouble. If they wanted us to call them kings and dukes, I
hadn’t no objections, ’long as it would keep peace in the family; and it warn’t no
use to tell Jim, so I didn’t tell him. If I never learnt nothing else out of pap, I
learnt that the best way to get along with his kind of people is to let them have
their own way.
c19-166.jpg (33K)
c20-167.jpg (184K)
CHAPTER XX.
THEY asked us considerable many questions; wanted to know what we
covered up the raft that way for, and laid by in the daytime instead of running—
was Jim a runaway nigger? Says I:
“Goodness sakes! would a runaway nigger run south?”
No, they allowed he wouldn’t. I had to account for things some way, so I
says:
“My folks was living in Pike County, in Missouri, where I was born, and they
all died off but me and pa and my brother Ike. Pa, he ’lowed he’d break up and
go down and live with Uncle Ben, who’s got a little one-horse place on the river,
forty-four mile below Orleans. Pa was pretty poor, and had some debts; so when
he’d squared up there warn’t nothing left but sixteen dollars and our nigger, Jim.
That warn’t enough to take us fourteen hundred mile, deck passage nor no other
way. Well, when the river rose pa had a streak of luck one day; he ketched this
piece of a raft; so we reckoned we’d go down to Orleans on it. Pa’s luck didn’t
hold out; a steamboat run over the forrard corner of the raft one night, and we all
went overboard and dove under the wheel; Jim and me come up all right, but pa
was drunk, and Ike was only four years old, so they never come up no more.
Well, for the next day or two we had considerable trouble, because people was
always coming out in skiffs and trying to take Jim away from me, saying they
believed he was a runaway nigger. We don’t run daytimes no more now; nights
they don’t bother us.”
The duke says:
“Leave me alone to cipher out a way so we can run in the daytime if we want
to. I’ll think the thing over—I’ll invent a plan that’ll fix it. We’ll let it alone for
to-day, because of course we don’t want to go by that town yonder in daylight—
it mightn’t be healthy.”
Towards night it begun to darken up and look like rain; the heat lightning was
squirting around low down in the sky, and the leaves was beginning to shiver—it
was going to be pretty ugly, it was easy to see that. So the duke and the king
went to overhauling our wigwam, to see what the beds was like. My bed was a
straw tick better than Jim’s, which was a corn-shuck tick; there’s always cobs
around about in a shuck tick, and they poke into you and hurt; and when you roll
over the dry shucks sound like you was rolling over in a pile of dead leaves; it
makes such a rustling that you wake up. Well, the duke allowed he would take
my bed; but the king allowed he wouldn’t. He says:
“I should a reckoned the difference in rank would a sejested to you that a
corn-shuck bed warn’t just fitten for me to sleep on. Your Grace ’ll take the
shuck bed yourself.”
Jim and me was in a sweat again for a minute, being afraid there was going to
be some more trouble amongst them; so we was pretty glad when the duke says:
“’Tis my fate to be always ground into the mire under the iron heel of
oppression. Misfortune has broken my once haughty spirit; I yield, I submit; ’tis
my fate. I am alone in the world—let me suffer; can bear it.”
We got away as soon as it was good and dark. The king told us to stand well
out towards the middle of the river, and not show a light till we got a long ways
below the town. We come in sight of the little bunch of lights by and by—that
was the town, you know—and slid by, about a half a mile out, all right. When
we was three-quarters of a mile below we hoisted up our signal lantern; and
about ten o’clock it come on to rain and blow and thunder and lighten like
everything; so the king told us to both stay on watch till the weather got better;
then him and the duke crawled into the wigwam and turned in for the night. It
was my watch below till twelve, but I wouldn’t a turned in anyway if I’d had a
bed, because a body don’t see such a storm as that every day in the week, not by
a long sight. My souls, how the wind did scream along! And every second or
two there’d come a glare that lit up the white-caps for a half a mile around, and
you’d see the islands looking dusty through the rain, and the trees thrashing
around in the wind; then comes a H-WHACK!—bum! bum! bumble-umble-umbum-bum-bum-bum—and the thunder would go rumbling and grumbling away,
and quit—and then RIP comes another flash and another sockdolager. The
waves most washed me off the raft sometimes, but I hadn’t any clothes on, and
didn’t mind. We didn’t have no trouble about snags; the lightning was glaring
and flittering around so constant that we could see them plenty soon enough to
throw her head this way or that and miss them.
I had the middle watch, you know, but I was pretty sleepy by that time, so Jim
he said he would stand the first half of it for me; he was always mighty good that
way, Jim was. I crawled into the wigwam, but the king and the duke had their
legs sprawled around so there warn’t no show for me; so I laid outside—I didn’t
mind the rain, because it was warm, and the waves warn’t running so high now.
About two they come up again, though, and Jim was going to call me; but he
changed his mind, because he reckoned they warn’t high enough yet to do any
harm; but he was mistaken about that, for pretty soon all of a sudden along
comes a regular ripper and washed me overboard. It most killed Jim a-laughing.
He was the easiest nigger to laugh that ever was, anyway.
I took the watch, and Jim he laid down and snored away; and by and by the
storm let up for good and all; and the first cabin-light that showed I rousted him
out, and we slid the raft into hiding quarters for the day.
The king got out an old ratty deck of cards after breakfast, and him and the
duke played seven-up a while, five cents a game. Then they got tired of it, and
allowed they would “lay out a campaign,” as they called it. The duke went down
into his carpet-bag, and fetched up a lot of little printed bills and read them out
loud. One bill said, “The celebrated Dr. Armand de Montalban, of Paris,” would
“lecture on the Science of Phrenology” at such and such a place, on the blank
day of blank, at ten cents admission, and “furnish charts of character at twentyfive cents apiece.” The duke said that was him. In another bill he was the
“world-renowned Shakespearian tragedian, Garrick the Younger, of Drury Lane,
London.” In other bills he had a lot of other names and done other wonderful
things, like finding water and gold with a “divining-rod,” “dissipating witch
spells,” and so on. By and by he says:
“But the histrionic muse is the darling. Have you ever trod the boards,
Royalty?”
“No,” says the king.
“You shall, then, before you’re three days older, Fallen Grandeur,” says the
duke. "The first good town we come to we’ll hire a hall and do the sword fight
in Richard III. and the balcony scene in Romeo and Juliet. How does that strike
you?”
“I’m in, up to the hub, for anything that will pay, Bilgewater; but, you see, I
don’t know nothing about play-actin’, and hain’t ever seen much of it. I was too
small when pap used to have ’em at the palace. Do you reckon you can learn
me?”
“Easy!”
“All right. I’m jist a-freezn’ for something fresh, anyway. Le’s commence
right away.”
So the duke he told him all about who Romeo was and who Juliet was, and
said he was used to being Romeo, so the king could be Juliet.
“But if Juliet’s such a young gal, duke, my peeled head and my white
whiskers is goin’ to look oncommon odd on her, maybe.”
“No, don’t you worry; these country jakes won’t ever think of that. Besides,
you know, you’ll be in costume, and that makes all the difference in the world;
Juliet’s in a balcony, enjoying the moonlight before she goes to bed, and she’s
got on her night-gown and her ruffled nightcap. Here are the costumes for the
parts.”
c20-170.jpg (62K)
He got out two or three curtain-calico suits, which he said was meedyevil
armor for Richard III. and t’other chap, and a long white cotton nightshirt and a
ruffled nightcap to match. The king was satisfied; so the duke got out his book
and read the parts over in the most splendid spread-eagle way, prancing around
and acting at the same time, to show how it had got to be done; then he give the
book to the king and told him to get his part by heart.
There was a little one-horse town about three mile down the bend, and after
dinner the duke said he had ciphered out his idea about how to run in daylight
without it being dangersome for Jim; so he allowed he would go down to the
town and fix that thing. The king allowed he would go, too, and see if he
couldn’t strike something. We was out of coffee, so Jim said I better go along
with them in the canoe and get some.
When we got there there warn’t nobody stirring; streets empty, and perfectly
dead and still, like Sunday. We found a sick nigger sunning himself in a back
yard, and he said everybody that warn’t too young or too sick or too old was
gone to camp-meeting, about two mile back in the woods. The king got the
directions, and allowed he’d go and work that camp-meeting for all it was worth,
and I might go, too.
The duke said what he was after was a printing-office. We found it; a little bit
of a concern, up over a carpenter shop—carpenters and printers all gone to the
meeting, and no doors locked. It was a dirty, littered-up place, and had ink
marks, and handbills with pictures of horses and runaway niggers on them, all
over the walls. The duke shed his coat and said he was all right now. So me and
the king lit out for the camp-meeting.
We got there in about a half an hour fairly dripping, for it was a most awful
hot day. There was as much as a thousand people there from twenty mile
around. The woods was full of teams and wagons, hitched everywheres, feeding
out of the wagon-troughs and stomping to keep off the flies. There was sheds
made out of poles and roofed over with branches, where they had lemonade and
gingerbread to sell, and piles of watermelons and green corn and such-like truck.
The preaching was going on under the same kinds of sheds, only they was
bigger and held crowds of people. The benches was made out of outside slabs of
logs, with holes bored in the round side to drive sticks into for legs. They didn’t
have no backs. The preachers had high platforms to stand on at one end of the
sheds. The women had on sun-bonnets; and some had linsey-woolsey frocks,
some gingham ones, and a few of the young ones had on calico. Some of the
young men was barefooted, and some of the children didn’t have on any clothes
but just a tow-linen shirt. Some of the old women was knitting, and some of the
young folks was courting on the sly.
c20-172.jpg (72K)
The first shed we come to the preacher was lining out a hymn. He lined out
two lines, everybody sung it, and it was kind of grand to hear it, there was so
many of them and they done it in such a rousing way; then he lined out two more
for them to sing—and so on. The people woke up more and more, and sung
louder and louder; and towards the end some begun to groan, and some begun to
shout. Then the preacher begun to preach, and begun in earnest, too; and went
weaving first to one side of the platform and then the other, and then a-leaning
down over the front of it, with his arms and his body going all the time, and
shouting his words out with all his might; and every now and then he would hold
up his Bible and spread it open, and kind of pass it around this way and that,
shouting, “It’s the brazen serpent in the wilderness! Look upon it and live!”
And people would shout out, “Glory!—A-a-men!” And so he went on, and the
people groaning and crying and saying amen:
“Oh, come to the mourners’ bench! come, black with sin! (Amen!) come, sick
and sore! (Amen!) come, lame and halt and blind! (Amen!) come, pore and
needy, sunk in shame! (A-A-Men!) come, all that’s worn and soiled and
suffering!—come with a broken spirit! come with a contrite heart! come in your
rags and sin and dirt! the waters that cleanse is free, the door of heaven stands
open—oh, enter in and be at rest!” (A-A-Men! Glory, Glory Hallelujah!)
And so on. You couldn’t make out what the preacher said any more, on
account of the shouting and crying. Folks got up everywheres in the crowd, and
worked their way just by main strength to the mourners’ bench, with the tears
running down their faces; and when all the mourners had got up there to the
front benches in a crowd, they sung and shouted and flung themselves down on
the straw, just crazy and wild.
Well, the first I knowed the king got a-going, and you could hear him over
everybody; and next he went a-charging up on to the platform, and the preacher
he begged him to speak to the people, and he done it. He told them he was a
pirate—been a pirate for thirty years out in the Indian Ocean—and his crew was
thinned out considerable last spring in a fight, and he was home now to take out
some fresh men, and thanks to goodness he’d been robbed last night and put
ashore off of a steamboat without a cent, and he was glad of it; it was the
blessedest thing that ever happened to him, because he was a changed man now,
and happy for the first time in his life; and, poor as he was, he was going to start
right off and work his way back to the Indian Ocean, and put in the rest of his
life trying to turn the pirates into the true path; for he could do it better than
anybody else, being acquainted with all pirate crews in that ocean; and though it
would take him a long time to get there without money, he would get there
anyway, and every time he convinced a pirate he would say to him, “Don’t you
thank me, don’t you give me no credit; it all belongs to them dear people in
Pokeville camp-meeting, natural brothers and benefactors of the race, and that
dear preacher there, the truest friend a pirate ever had!”
c20-174.jpg (45K)
And then he busted into tears, and so did everybody. Then somebody sings
out, “Take up a collection for him, take up a collection!” Well, a half a dozen
made a jump to do it, but somebody sings out, “Let him pass the hat around!”
Then everybody said it, the preacher too.
So the king went all through the crowd with his hat swabbing his eyes, and
blessing the people and praising them and thanking them for being so good to
the poor pirates away off there; and every little while the prettiest kind of girls,
with the tears running down their cheeks, would up and ask him would he let
them kiss him for to remember him by; and he always done it; and some of them
he hugged and kissed as many as five or six times—and he was invited to stay a
week; and everybody wanted him to live in their houses, and said they’d think it
was an honor; but he said as this was the last day of the camp-meeting he
couldn’t do no good, and besides he was in a sweat to get to the Indian Ocean
right off and go to work on the pirates.
When we got back to the raft and he come to count up he found he had
collected eighty-seven dollars and seventy-five cents. And then he had fetched
away a three-gallon jug of whisky, too, that he found under a wagon when he
was starting home through the woods. The king said, take it all around, it laid
over any day he’d ever put in in the missionarying line. He said it warn’t no use
talking, heathens don’t amount to shucks alongside of pirates to work a campmeeting with.
The duke was thinking he’d been doing pretty well till the king come to show
up, but after that he didn’t think so so much. He had set up and printed off two
little jobs for farmers in that printing-office—horse bills—and took the money,
four dollars. And he had got in ten dollars’ worth of advertisements for the
paper, which he said he would put in for four dollars if they would pay in
advance—so they done it. The price of the paper was two dollars a year, but he
took in three subscriptions for half a dollar apiece on condition of them paying
him in advance; they were going to pay in cordwood and onions as usual, but he
said he had just bought the concern and knocked down the price as low as he
could afford it, and was going to run it for cash. He set up a little piece of
poetry, which he made, himself, out of his own head—three verses—kind of
sweet and saddish—the name of it was, “Yes, crush, cold world, this breaking
heart”—and he left that all set up and ready to print in the paper, and didn’t
charge nothing for it. Well, he took in nine dollars and a half, and said he’d done
a pretty square day’s work for it.
Then he showed us another little job he’d printed and hadn’t charged for,
because it was for us. It had a picture of a runaway nigger with a bundle on a
stick over his shoulder, and “$200 reward” under it. The reading was all about
Jim, and just described him to a dot. It said he run away from St. Jacques’
plantation, forty mile below New Orleans, last winter, and likely went north, and
whoever would catch him and send him back he could have the reward and
expenses.
c20-175.jpg (56K)
“Now,” says the duke, “after to-night we can run in the daytime if we want to.
Whenever we see anybody coming we can tie Jim hand and foot with a rope,
and lay him in the wigwam and show this handbill and say we captured him up
the river, and were too poor to travel on a steamboat, so we got this little raft on
credit from our friends and are going down to get the reward. Handcuffs and
chains would look still better on Jim, but it wouldn’t go well with the story of us
being so poor. Too much like jewelry. Ropes are the correct thing—we must
preserve the unities, as we say on the boards.”
We all said the duke was pretty smart, and there couldn’t be no trouble about
running daytimes. We judged we could make miles enough that night to get out
of the reach of the powwow we reckoned the duke’s work in the printing office
was going to make in that little town; then we could boom right along if we
wanted to.
We laid low and kept still, and never shoved out till nearly ten o’clock; then
we slid by, pretty wide away from the town, and didn’t hoist our lantern till we
was clear out of sight of it.
When Jim called me to take the watch at four in the morning, he says:
“Huck, does you reck’n we gwyne to run acrost any mo’ kings on dis trip?”
“No,” I says, “I reckon not.”
“Well,” says he, “dat’s all right, den. I doan’ mine one er two kings, but dat’s
enough. Dis one’s powerful drunk, en de duke ain’ much better.”
I found Jim had been trying to get him to talk French, so he could hear what it
was like; but he said he had been in this country so long, and had so much
trouble, he’d forgot it.
c21-177.jpg (174K)
CHAPTER XXI.
IT was after sun-up now, but we went right on and didn’t tie up. The king and
the duke turned out by and by looking pretty rusty; but after they’d jumped
overboard and took a swim it chippered them up a good deal. After breakfast the
king he took a seat on the corner of the raft, and pulled off his boots and rolled
up his britches, and let his legs dangle in the water, so as to be comfortable, and
lit his pipe, and went to getting his Romeo and Juliet by heart. When he had got
it pretty good him and the duke begun to practice it together. The duke had to
learn him over and over again how to say every speech; and he made him sigh,
and put his hand on his heart, and after a while he said he done it pretty well;
“only,” he says, “you mustn’t bellow out Romeo! that way, like a bull—you must
say it soft and sick and languishy, so—R-o-o-meo! that is the idea; for Juliet’s a
dear sweet mere child of a girl, you know, and she doesn’t bray like a jackass.”
Well, next they got out a couple of long swords that the duke made out of oak
laths, and begun to practice the sword fight—the duke called himself Richard
III.; and the way they laid on and pranced around the raft was grand to see. But
by and by the king tripped and fell overboard, and after that they took a rest, and
had a talk about all kinds of adventures they’d had in other times along the river.
After dinner the duke says:
“Well, Capet, we’ll want to make this a first-class show, you know, so I guess
we’ll add a little more to it. We want a little something to answer encores with,
anyway.”
“What’s onkores, Bilgewater?”
The duke told him, and then says:
“I’ll answer by doing the Highland fling or the sailor’s hornpipe; and you—
well, let me see—oh, I’ve got it—you can do Hamlet’s soliloquy.”
“Hamlet’s which?”
“Hamlet’s soliloquy, you know; the most celebrated thing in Shakespeare. Ah,
it’s sublime, sublime! Always fetches the house. I haven’t got it in the book—
I’ve only got one volume—but I reckon I can piece it out from memory. I’ll just
walk up and down a minute, and see if I can call it back from recollection’s
vaults.”
c21-178.jpg (57K)
So he went to marching up and down, thinking, and frowning horrible every
now and then; then he would hoist up his eyebrows; next he would squeeze his
hand on his forehead and stagger back and kind of moan; next he would sigh,
and next he’d let on to drop a tear. It was beautiful to see him. By and by he got
it. He told us to give attention. Then he strikes a most noble attitude, with one
leg shoved forwards, and his arms stretched away up, and his head tilted back,
looking up at the sky; and then he begins to rip and rave and grit his teeth; and
after that, all through his speech, he howled, and spread around, and swelled up
his chest, and just knocked the spots out of any acting ever I see before. This is
the speech—I learned it, easy enough, while he was learning it to the king:
c21-179.jpg (149K)
c21-180.jpg (145K)
c21-181.jpg (157K) To be, or not to be; that is the bare bodkin That makes
calamity of so long life; For who would fardels bear, till Birnam Wood do come
to Dunsinane, But that the fear of something after death Murders the innocent
sleep, Great nature’s second course, And makes us rather sling the arrows of
outrageous fortune Than fly to others that we know not of. There’s the respect
must give us pause: Wake Duncan with thy knocking! I would thou couldst; For
who would bear the whips and scorns of time, The oppressor’s wrong, the proud
man’s contumely, The law’s delay, and the quietus which his pangs might take.
In the dead waste and middle of the night, when churchyards yawn In customary
suits of solemn black, But that the undiscovered country from whose bourne no
traveler returns, Breathes forth contagion on the world, And thus the native hue
of resolution, like the poor cat i’ the adage, Is sicklied o’er with care. And all the
clouds that lowered o’er our housetops, With this regard their currents turn awry,
And lose the name of action. ’Tis a consummation devoutly to be wished. But
soft you, the fair Ophelia: Ope not thy ponderous and marble jaws. But get thee
to a nunnery—go!
Well, the old man he liked that speech, and he mighty soon got it so he could
do it first rate. It seemed like he was just born for it; and when he had his hand in
and was excited, it was perfectly lovely the way he would rip and tear and rair
up behind when he was getting it off.
The first chance we got, the duke he had some show bills printed; and after
that, for two or three days as we floated along, the raft was a most uncommon
lively place, for there warn’t nothing but sword-fighting and rehearsing—as the
duke called it—going on all the time. One morning, when we was pretty well
down the State of Arkansaw, we come in sight of a little one-horse town in a big
bend; so we tied up about three-quarters of a mile above it, in the mouth of a
crick which was shut in like a tunnel by the cypress trees, and all of us but Jim
took the canoe and went down there to see if there was any chance in that place
for our show.
We struck it mighty lucky; there was going to be a circus there that afternoon,
and the country people was already beginning to come in, in all kinds of old
shackly wagons, and on horses. The circus would leave before night, so our
show would have a pretty good chance. The duke he hired the court house, and
we went around and stuck up our bills. They read like this:
Shaksperean Revival!!!
Wonderful Attraction!
For One Night Only! The world renowned tragedians,
David Garrick the younger, of Drury Lane Theatre, London,
and
Edmund Kean the elder, of the Royal Haymarket Theatre, Whitechapel,
Pudding Lane, Piccadilly, London, and the Royal Continental Theatres, in
their sublime Shaksperean Spectacle entitled The Balcony Scene in
Romeo and Juliet!!!
Romeo...................................... Mr. Garrick.
Juliet..................................... Mr. Kean.
Assisted by the whole strength of the company!
New costumes, new scenery, new appointments!
Also:
The thrilling, masterly, and blood-curdling Broad-sword conflict In
Richard III.!!!
Richard III................................ Mr. Garrick.
Richmond................................... Mr. Kean.
also:
(by special request,)
Hamlet’s Immortal Soliloquy!!
By the Illustrious Kean!
Done by him 300 consecutive nights in Paris!
For One Night Only,
On account of imperative European engagements!
Admission 25 cents; children and servants, 10 cents.
Then we went loafing around the town. The stores and houses was most all
old shackly dried-up frame concerns that hadn’t ever been painted; they was set
up three or four foot above ground on stilts, so as to be out of reach of the water
when the river was overflowed. The houses had little gardens around them, but
they didn’t seem to raise hardly anything in them but jimpson weeds, and
sunflowers, and ash-piles, and old curled-up boots and shoes, and pieces of
bottles, and rags, and played-out tin-ware. The fences was made of different
kinds of boards, nailed on at different times; and they leaned every which-way,
and had gates that didn’t generly have but one hinge—a leather one. Some of the
fences had been whitewashed, some time or another, but the duke said it was in
Clumbus’s time, like enough. There was generly hogs in the garden, and people
driving them out.
All the stores was along one street. They had white domestic awnings in
front, and the country people hitched their horses to the awning-posts. There was
empty drygoods boxes under the awnings, and loafers roosting on them all day
long, whittling them with their Barlow knives; and chawing tobacco, and gaping
and yawning and stretching—a mighty ornery lot. They generly had on yellow
straw hats most as wide as an umbrella, but didn’t wear no coats nor waistcoats,
they called one another Bill, and Buck, and Hank, and Joe, and Andy, and talked
lazy and drawly, and used considerable many cuss words. There was as many as
one loafer leaning up against every awning-post, and he most always had his
hands in his britches-pockets, except when he fetched them out to lend a chaw of
tobacco or scratch. What a body was hearing amongst them all the time was:
“Gimme a chaw ’v tobacker, Hank.”
“Cain’t; I hain’t got but one chaw left. Ask Bill.”
c21-182.jpg (78K)
Maybe Bill he gives him a chaw; maybe he lies and says he ain’t got none.
Some of them kinds of loafers never has a cent in the world, nor a chaw of
tobacco of their own. They get all their chawing by borrowing; they say to a
fellow, “I wisht you’d len’ me a chaw, Jack, I jist this minute give Ben
Thompson the last chaw I had”—which is a lie pretty much everytime; it don’t
fool nobody but a stranger; but Jack ain’t no stranger, so he says:
“You give him a chaw, did you? So did your sister’s cat’s grandmother. You
pay me back the chaws you’ve awready borry’d off’n me, Lafe Buckner, then
I’ll loan you one or two ton of it, and won’t charge you no back intrust, nuther.”
“Well, I did pay you back some of it wunst.”
“Yes, you did—’bout six chaws. You borry’d store tobacker and paid back
nigger-head.”
Store tobacco is flat black plug, but these fellows mostly chaws the natural
leaf twisted. When they borrow a chaw they don’t generly cut it off with a knife,
but set the plug in between their teeth, and gnaw with their teeth and tug at the
plug with their hands till they get it in two; then sometimes the one that owns the
tobacco looks mournful at it when it’s handed back, and says, sarcastic:
“Here, gimme the chaw, and you take the plug.”
All the streets and lanes was just mud; they warn’t nothing else but mud—
mud as black as tar and nigh about a foot deep in some places, and two or three
inches deep in all the places. The hogs loafed and grunted around everywheres.
You’d see a muddy sow and a litter of pigs come lazying along the street and
whollop herself right down in the way, where folks had to walk around her, and
she’d stretch out and shut her eyes and wave her ears whilst the pigs was milking
her, and look as happy as if she was on salary. And pretty soon you’d hear a
loafer sing out, “Hi! so boy! sick him, Tige!” and away the sow would go,
squealing most horrible, with a dog or two swinging to each ear, and three or
four dozen more a-coming; and then you would see all the loafers get up and
watch the thing out of sight, and laugh at the fun and look grateful for the noise.
Then they’d settle back again till there was a dog fight. There couldn’t anything
wake them up all over, and make them happy all over, like a dog fight—unless it
might be putting turpentine on a stray dog and setting fire to him, or tying a tin
pan to his tail and see him run himself to death.
On the river front some of the houses was sticking out over the bank, and they
was bowed and bent, and about ready to tumble in. The people had moved out of
them. The bank was caved away under one corner of some others, and that
corner was hanging over. People lived in them yet, but it was dangersome,
because sometimes a strip of land as wide as a house caves in at a time.
Sometimes a belt of land a quarter of a mile deep will start in and cave along
and cave along till it all caves into the river in one summer. Such a town as that
has to be always moving back, and back, and back, because the river’s always
gnawing at it.
The nearer it got to noon that day the thicker and thicker was the wagons and
horses in the streets, and more coming all the time. Families fetched their
dinners with them from the country, and eat them in the wagons. There was
considerable whisky drinking going on, and I seen three fights. By and by
somebody sings out:
“Here comes old Boggs!—in from the country for his little old monthly drunk;
here he comes, boys!”
All the loafers looked glad; I reckoned they was used to having fun out of
Boggs. One of them says:
“Wonder who he’s a-gwyne to chaw up this time. If he’d a-chawed up all the
men he’s ben a-gwyne to chaw up in the last twenty year he’d have considerable
ruputation now.”
Another one says, “I wisht old Boggs ’d threaten me, ’cuz then I’d know I
warn’t gwyne to die for a thousan’ year.”
Boggs comes a-tearing along on his horse, whooping and yelling like an Injun,
and singing out:
“Cler the track, thar. I’m on the waw-path, and the price uv coffins is agwyne to raise.”
c21-185.jpg (64K)
He was drunk, and weaving about in his saddle; he was over fifty year old,
and had a very red face. Everybody yelled at him and laughed at him and sassed
him, and he sassed back, and said he’d attend to them and lay them out in their
regular turns, but he couldn’t wait now because he’d come to town to kill old
Colonel Sherburn, and his motto was, “Meat first, and spoon vittles to top off
on.”
He see me, and rode up and says:
“Whar’d you come f’m, boy? You prepared to die?”
Then he rode on. I was scared, but a man says:
“He don’t mean nothing; he’s always a-carryin’ on like that when he’s drunk.
He’s the best naturedest old fool in Arkansaw—never hurt nobody, drunk nor
sober.”
Boggs rode up before the biggest store in town, and bent his head down so he
could see under the curtain of the awning and yells:
“Come out here, Sherburn! Come out and meet the man you’ve swindled.
You’re the houn’ I’m after, and I’m a-gwyne to have you, too!”
And so he went on, calling Sherburn everything he could lay his tongue to,
and the whole street packed with people listening and laughing and going on.
By and by a proud-looking man about fifty-five—and he was a heap the best
dressed man in that town, too—steps out of the store, and the crowd drops back
on each side to let him come. He says to Boggs, mighty ca’m and slow—he
says:
“I’m tired of this, but I’ll endure it till one o’clock. Till one o’clock, mind—
no longer. If you open your mouth against me only once after that time you
can’t travel so far but I will find you.”
Then he turns and goes in. The crowd looked mighty sober; nobody stirred,
and there warn’t no more laughing. Boggs rode off blackguarding Sherburn as
loud as he could yell, all down the street; and pretty soon back he comes and
stops before the store, still keeping it up. Some men crowded around him and
tried to get him to shut up, but he wouldn’t; they told him it would be one
o’clock in about fifteen minutes, and so he must go home—he must go right
away. But it didn’t do no good. He cussed away with all his might, and throwed
his hat down in the mud and rode over it, and pretty soon away he went a-raging
down the street again, with his gray hair a-flying. Everybody that could get a
chance at him tried their best to coax him off of his horse so they could lock him
up and get him sober; but it warn’t no use—up the street he would tear again,
and give Sherburn another cussing. By and by somebody says:
“Go for his daughter!—quick, go for his daughter; sometimes he’ll listen to
her. If anybody can persuade him, she can.”
So somebody started on a run. I walked down street a ways and stopped. In
about five or ten minutes here comes Boggs again, but not on his horse. He was
a-reeling across the street towards me, bare-headed, with a friend on both sides
of him a-holt of his arms and hurrying him along. He was quiet, and looked
uneasy; and he warn’t hanging back any, but was doing some of the hurrying
himself. Somebody sings out:
“Boggs!”
I looked over there to see who said it, and it was that Colonel Sherburn. He
was standing perfectly still in the street, and had a pistol raised in his right hand
—not aiming it, but holding it out with the barrel tilted up towards the sky. The
same second I see a young girl coming on the run, and two men with her. Boggs
and the men turned round to see who called him, and when they see the pistol
the men jumped to one side, and the pistol-barrel come down slow and steady to
a level—both barrels cocked. Boggs throws up both of his hands and says, “O
Lord, don’t shoot!” Bang! goes the first shot, and he staggers back, clawing at
the air—bang! goes the second one, and he tumbles backwards on to the ground,
heavy and solid, with his arms spread out. That young girl screamed out and
comes rushing, and down she throws herself on her father, crying, and saying,
“Oh, he’s killed him, he’s killed him!” The crowd closed up around them, and
shouldered and jammed one another, with their necks stretched, trying to see,
and people on the inside trying to shove them back and shouting, “Back, back!
give him air, give him air!”
c21-187.jpg (64K)
Colonel Sherburn he tossed his pistol on to the ground, and turned around on
his heels and walked off.
They took Boggs to a little drug store, the crowd pressing around just the
same, and the whole town following, and I rushed and got a good place at the
window, where I was close to him and could see in. They laid him on the floor
and put one large Bible under his head, and opened another one and spread it on
his breast; but they tore open his shirt first, and I seen where one of the bullets
went in. He made about a dozen long gasps, his breast lifting the Bible up when
he drawed in his breath, and letting it down again when he breathed it out—and
after that he laid still; he was dead. Then they pulled his daughter away from
him, screaming and crying, and took her off. She was about sixteen, and very
sweet and gentle looking, but awful pale and scared.
Well, pretty soon the whole town was there, squirming and scrouging and
pushing and shoving to get at the window and have a look, but people that had
the places wouldn’t give them up, and folks behind them was saying all the time,
“Say, now, you’ve looked enough, you fellows; ’tain’t right and ’tain’t fair for
you to stay thar all the time, and never give nobody a chance; other folks has
their rights as well as you.”
There was considerable jawing back, so I slid out, thinking maybe there was
going to be trouble. The streets was full, and everybody was excited. Everybody
that seen the shooting was telling how it happened, and there was a big crowd
packed around each one of these fellows, stretching their necks and listening.
One long, lanky man, with long hair and a big white fur stovepipe hat on the
back of his head, and a crooked-handled cane, marked out the places on the
ground where Boggs stood and where Sherburn stood, and the people following
him around from one place to t’other and watching everything he done, and
bobbing their heads to show they understood, and stooping a little and resting
their hands on their thighs to watch him mark the places on the ground with his
cane; and then he stood up straight and stiff where Sherburn had stood, frowning
and having his hat-brim down over his eyes, and sung out, “Boggs!” and then
fetched his cane down slow to a level, and says “Bang!” staggered backwards,
says “Bang!” again, and fell down flat on his back. The people that had seen the
thing said he done it perfect; said it was just exactly the way it all happened.
Then as much as a dozen people got out their bottles and treated him.
Well, by and by somebody said Sherburn ought to be lynched. In about a
minute everybody was saying it; so away they went, mad and yelling, and
snatching down every clothes-line they come to to do the hanging with.
c22-189.jpg (174K)
CHAPTER XXII.
THEY swarmed up towards Sherburn’s house, a-whooping and raging like
Injuns, and everything had to clear the way or get run over and tromped to mush,
and it was awful to see. Children was heeling it ahead of the mob, screaming
and trying to get out of the way; and every window along the road was full of
women’s heads, and there was nigger boys in every tree, and bucks and wenches
looking over every fence; and as soon as the mob would get nearly to them they
would break and skaddle back out of reach. Lots of the women and girls was
crying and taking on, scared most to death.
They swarmed up in front of Sherburn’s palings as thick as they could jam
together, and you couldn’t hear yourself think for the noise. It was a little
twenty-foot yard. Some sung out “Tear down the fence! tear down the fence!”
Then there was a racket of ripping and tearing and smashing, and down she
goes, and the front wall of the crowd begins to roll in like a wave.
Just then Sherburn steps out on to the roof of his little front porch, with a
double-barrel gun in his hand, and takes his stand, perfectly ca’m and deliberate,
not saying a word. The racket stopped, and the wave sucked back.
Sherburn never said a word—just stood there, looking down. The stillness
was awful creepy and uncomfortable. Sherburn run his eye slow along the
crowd; and wherever it struck the people tried a little to out-gaze him, but they
couldn’t; they dropped their eyes and looked sneaky. Then pretty soon Sherburn
sort of laughed; not the pleasant kind, but the kind that makes you feel like when
you are eating bread that’s got sand in it.
Then he says, slow and scornful:
“The idea of you lynching anybody! It’s amusing. The idea of you thinking
you had pluck enough to lynch a man! Because you’re brave enough to tar and
feather poor friendless cast-out women that come along here, did that make you
think you had grit enough to lay your hands on a man? Why, a man’s safe in the
hands of ten thousand of your kind—as long as it’s daytime and you’re not
behind him.
“Do I know you? I know you clear through. I was born and raised in the
South, and I’ve lived in the North; so I know the average all around. The average
man’s a coward. In the North he lets anybody walk over him that wants to, and
goes home and prays for a humble spirit to bear it. In the South one man all by
himself, has stopped a stage full of men in the daytime, and robbed the lot. Your
newspapers call you a brave people so much that you think you are braver than
any other people—whereas you’re just as brave, and no braver. Why don’t your
juries hang murderers? Because they’re afraid the man’s friends will shoot them
in the back, in the dark—and it’s just what they would do.
“So they always acquit; and then a man goes in the night, with a hundred
masked cowards at his back and lynches the rascal. Your mistake is, that you
didn’t bring a man with you; that’s one mistake, and the other is that you didn’t
come in the dark and fetch your masks. You brought part of a man—Buck
Harkness, there—and if you hadn’t had him to start you, you’d a taken it out in
blowing.
“You didn’t want to come. The average man don’t like trouble and danger.
You don’t like trouble and danger. But if only half a man—like Buck Harkness,
there—shouts ’Lynch him! lynch him!’ you’re afraid to back down—afraid
you’ll be found out to be what you are—cowards—and so you raise a yell, and
hang yourselves on to that half-a-man’s coat-tail, and come raging up here,
swearing what big things you’re going to do. The pitifulest thing out is a mob;
that’s what an army is—a mob; they don’t fight with courage that’s born in them,
but with courage that’s borrowed from their mass, and from their officers. But a
mob without any man at the head of it is beneath pitifulness. Now the thing for
you to do is to droop your tails and go home and crawl in a hole. If any real
lynching’s going to be done it will be done in the dark, Southern fashion; and
when they come they’ll bring their masks, and fetch a man along. Now leave—
and take your half-a-man with you”—tossing his gun up across his left arm and
cocking it when he says this.
The crowd washed back sudden, and then broke all apart, and went tearing off
every which way, and Buck Harkness he heeled it after them, looking tolerable
cheap. I could a stayed if I wanted to, but I didn’t want to.
I went to the circus and loafed around the back side till the watchman went by,
and then dived in under the tent. I had my twenty-dollar gold piece and some
other money, but I reckoned I better save it, because there ain’t no telling how
soon you are going to need it, away from home and amongst strangers that way.
You can’t be too careful. I ain’t opposed to spending money on circuses when
there ain’t no other way, but there ain’t no use in wasting it on them.
c22-191.jpg (42K)
It was a real bully circus. It was the splendidest sight that ever was when they
all come riding in, two and two, a gentleman and lady, side by side, the men just
in their drawers and undershirts, and no shoes nor stirrups, and resting their
hands on their thighs easy and comfortable—there must a been twenty of them—
and every lady with a lovely complexion, and perfectly beautiful, and looking
just like a gang of real sure-enough queens, and dressed in clothes that cost
millions of dollars, and just littered with diamonds. It was a powerful fine sight;
I never see anything so lovely. And then one by one they got up and stood, and
went a-weaving around the ring so gentle and wavy and graceful, the men
looking ever so tall and airy and straight, with their heads bobbing and skimming
along, away up there under the tent-roof, and every lady’s rose-leafy dress
flapping soft and silky around her hips, and she looking like the most loveliest
parasol.
And then faster and faster they went, all of them dancing, first one foot out in
the air and then the other, the horses leaning more and more, and the ringmaster
going round and round the center-pole, cracking his whip and shouting “Hi!—
hi!” and the clown cracking jokes behind him; and by and by all hands dropped
the reins, and every lady put her knuckles on her hips and every gentleman
folded his arms, and then how the horses did lean over and hump themselves!
And so one after the other they all skipped off into the ring, and made the
sweetest bow I ever see, and then scampered out, and everybody clapped their
hands and went just about wild.
Well, all through the circus they done the most astonishing things; and all the
time that clown carried on so it most killed the people. The ringmaster couldn’t
ever say a word to him but he was back at him quick as a wink with the funniest
things a body ever said; and how he ever could think of so many of them, and so
sudden and so pat, was what I couldn’t noway understand. Why, I couldn’t a
thought of them in a year. And by and by a drunk man tried to get into the ring—
said he wanted to ride; said he could ride as well as anybody that ever was.
They argued and tried to keep him out, but he wouldn’t listen, and the whole
show come to a standstill. Then the people begun to holler at him and make fun
of him, and that made him mad, and he begun to rip and tear; so that stirred up
the people, and a lot of men begun to pile down off of the benches and swarm
towards the ring, saying, “Knock him down! throw him out!” and one or two
women begun to scream. So, then, the ringmaster he made a little speech, and
said he hoped there wouldn’t be no disturbance, and if the man would promise
he wouldn’t make no more trouble he would let him ride if he thought he could
stay on the horse. So everybody laughed and said all right, and the man got on.
The minute he was on, the horse begun to rip and tear and jump and cavort
around, with two circus men hanging on to his bridle trying to hold him, and the
drunk man hanging on to his neck, and his heels flying in the air every jump, and
the whole crowd of people standing up shouting and laughing till tears rolled
down. And at last, sure enough, all the circus men could do, the horse broke
loose, and away he went like the very nation, round and round the ring, with that
sot laying down on him and hanging to his neck, with first one leg hanging most
to the ground on one side, and then t’other one on t’other side, and the people
just crazy. It warn’t funny to me, though; I was all of a tremble to see his danger.
But pretty soon he struggled up astraddle and grabbed the bridle, a-reeling this
way and that; and the next minute he sprung up and dropped the bridle and
stood! and the horse a-going like a house afire too. He just stood up there, asailing around as easy and comfortable as if he warn’t ever drunk in his life—
and then he begun to pull off his clothes and sling them. He shed them so thick
they kind of clogged up the air, and altogether he shed seventeen suits. And,
then, there he was, slim and handsome, and dressed the gaudiest and prettiest
you ever saw, and he lit into that horse with his whip and made him fairly hum—
and finally skipped off, and made his bow and danced off to the dressing-room,
and everybody just a-howling with pleasure and astonishment.
c22-193.jpg (68K)
Then the ringmaster he see how he had been fooled, and he was the sickest
ringmaster you ever see, I reckon. Why, it was one of his own men! He had got
up that joke all out of his own head, and never let on to nobody. Well, I felt
sheepish enough to be took in so, but I wouldn’t a been in that ringmaster’s
place, not for a thousand dollars. I don’t know; there may be bullier circuses
than what that one was, but I never struck them yet. Anyways, it was plenty
good enough for me; and wherever I run across it, it can have all of my custom
every time.
Well, that night we had our show; but there warn’t only about twelve people
there—just enough to pay expenses. And they laughed all the time, and that
made the duke mad; and everybody left, anyway, before the show was over, but
one boy which was asleep. So the duke said these Arkansaw lunkheads couldn’t
come up to Shakespeare; what they wanted was low comedy—and maybe
something ruther worse than low comedy, he reckoned. He said he could size
their style. So next morning he got some big sheets of wrapping paper and some
black paint, and drawed off some handbills, and stuck them up all over the
village. The bills said:
c22-195.jpg (53K)
c23-196.jpg (167K)
CHAPTER XXIII.
WELL, all day him and the king was hard at it, rigging up a stage and a
curtain and a row of candles for footlights; and that night the house was jam full
of men in no time. When the place couldn’t hold no more, the duke he quit
tending door and went around the back way and come on to the stage and stood
up before the curtain and made a little speech, and praised up this tragedy, and
said it was the most thrillingest one that ever was; and so he went on a-bragging
about the tragedy, and about Edmund Kean the Elder, which was to play the
main principal part in it; and at last when he’d got everybody’s expectations up
high enough, he rolled up the curtain, and the next minute the king come aprancing out on all fours, naked; and he was painted all over, ring-streaked-and-
striped, all sorts of colors, as splendid as a rainbow. And—but never mind the
rest of his outfit; it was just wild, but it was awful funny. The people most killed
themselves laughing; and when the king got done capering and capered off
behind the scenes, they roared and clapped and stormed and haw-hawed till he
come back and done it over again, and after that they made him do it another
time. Well, it would make a cow laugh to see the shines that old idiot cut.
Then the duke he lets the curtain down, and bows to the people, and says the
great tragedy will be performed only two nights more, on accounts of pressing
London engagements, where the seats is all sold already for it in Drury Lane;
and then he makes them another bow, and says if he has succeeded in pleasing
them and instructing them, he will be deeply obleeged if they will mention it to
their friends and get them to come and see it.
Twenty people sings out:
“What, is it over? Is that all?”
The duke says yes. Then there was a fine time. Everybody sings out, “Sold!”
and rose up mad, and was a-going for that stage and them tragedians. But a big,
fine looking man jumps up on a bench and shouts:
“Hold on! Just a word, gentlemen.” They stopped to listen. "We are sold—
mighty badly sold. But we don’t want to be the laughing stock of this whole
town, I reckon, and never hear the last of this thing as long as we live. No.
What we want is to go out of here quiet, and talk this show up, and sell the rest
of the town! Then we’ll all be in the same boat. Ain’t that sensible?” (“You bet
it is!—the jedge is right!” everybody sings out.) “All right, then—not a word
about any sell. Go along home, and advise everybody to come and see the
tragedy.”
Next day you couldn’t hear nothing around that town but how splendid that
show was. House was jammed again that night, and we sold this crowd the same
way. When me and the king and the duke got home to the raft we all had a
supper; and by and by, about midnight, they made Jim and me back her out and
float her down the middle of the river, and fetch her in and hide her about two
mile below town.
The third night the house was crammed again—and they warn’t new-comers
this time, but people that was at the show the other two nights. I stood by the
duke at the door, and I see that every man that went in had his pockets bulging,
or something muffled up under his coat—and I see it warn’t no perfumery,
neither, not by a long sight. I smelt sickly eggs by the barrel, and rotten
cabbages, and such things; and if I know the signs of a dead cat being around,
and I bet I do, there was sixty-four of them went in. I shoved in there for a
minute, but it was too various for me; I couldn’t stand it. Well, when the place
couldn’t hold no more people the duke he give a fellow a quarter and told him to
tend door for him a minute, and then he started around for the stage door, I after
him; but the minute we turned the corner and was in the dark he says:
“Walk fast now till you get away from the houses, and then shin for the raft
like the dickens was after you!”
I done it, and he done the same. We struck the raft at the same time, and in
less than two seconds we was gliding down stream, all dark and still, and edging
towards the middle of the river, nobody saying a word. I reckoned the poor king
was in for a gaudy time of it with the audience, but nothing of the sort; pretty
soon he crawls out from under the wigwam, and says:
“Well, how’d the old thing pan out this time, duke?” He hadn’t been up-town
at all.
We never showed a light till we was about ten mile below the village. Then
we lit up and had a supper, and the king and the duke fairly laughed their bones
loose over the way they’d served them people. The duke says:
“Greenhorns, flatheads! I knew the first house would keep mum and let the
rest of the town get roped in; and I knew they’d lay for us the third night, and
consider it was their turn now. Well, it is their turn, and I’d give something to
know how much they’d take for it. I would just like to know how they’re putting
in their opportunity. They can turn it into a picnic if they want to—they brought
plenty provisions.”
Them rapscallions took in four hundred and sixty-five dollars in that three
nights. I never see money hauled in by the wagon-load like that before. By and
by, when they was asleep and snoring, Jim says:
c23-198.jpg (49K)
“Don’t it s’prise you de way dem kings carries on, Huck?”
“No,” I says, “it don’t.”
“Why don’t it, Huck?”
“Well, it don’t, because it’s in the breed. I reckon they’re all alike.”
“But, Huck, dese kings o’ ourn is reglar rapscallions; dat’s jist what dey is;
dey’s reglar rapscallions.”
“Well, that’s what I’m a-saying; all kings is mostly rapscallions, as fur as I can
make out.”
“Is dat so?”
“You read about them once—you’ll see. Look at Henry the Eight; this ’n ’s a
Sunday-school Superintendent to him. And look at Charles Second, and Louis
Fourteen, and Louis Fifteen, and James Second, and Edward Second, and
Richard Third, and forty more; besides all them Saxon heptarchies that used to
rip around so in old times and raise Cain. My, you ought to seen old Henry the
Eight when he was in bloom. He was a blossom. He used to marry a new wife
every day, and chop off her head next morning. And he would do it just as
indifferent as if he was ordering up eggs. 'Fetch up Nell Gwynn,’ he says. They
fetch her up. Next morning, ‘Chop off her head!’ And they chop it off. 'Fetch up
Jane Shore,’ he says; and up she comes, Next morning, ‘Chop off her head’—
and they chop it off. 'Ring up Fair Rosamun.’ Fair Rosamun answers the bell.
Next morning, ‘Chop off her head.’ And he made every one of them tell him a
tale every night; and he kept that up till he had hogged a thousand and one tales
that way, and then he put them all in a book, and called it Domesday Book—
which was a good name and stated the case. You don’t know kings, Jim, but I
know them; and this old rip of ourn is one of the cleanest I’ve struck in history.
Well, Henry he takes a notion he wants to get up some trouble with this country.
How does he go at it—give notice?—give the country a show? No. All of a
sudden he heaves all the tea in Boston Harbor overboard, and whacks out a
declaration of independence, and dares them to come on. That was his style—he
never give anybody a chance. He had suspicions of his father, the Duke of
Wellington. Well, what did he do? Ask him to show up? No—drownded him in
a butt of mamsey, like a cat. S’pose people left money laying around where he
was—what did he do? He collared it. S’pose he contracted to do a thing, and
you paid him, and didn’t set down there and see that he done it—what did he do?
He always done the other thing. S’pose he opened his mouth—what then? If he
didn’t shut it up powerful quick he’d lose a lie every time. That’s the kind of a
bug Henry was; and if we’d a had him along ’stead of our kings he’d a fooled
that town a heap worse than ourn done. I don’t say that ourn is lambs, because
they ain’t, when you come right down to the cold facts; but they ain’t nothing to
that old ram, anyway. All I say is, kings is kings, and you got to make
allowances. Take them all around, they’re a mighty ornery lot. It’s the way
they’re raised.”
c23-200.jpg (54K)
“But dis one do smell so like de nation, Huck.”
“Well, they all do, Jim. We can’t help the way a king smells; history don’t tell
no way.”
“Now de duke, he’s a tolerble likely man in some ways.”
“Yes, a duke’s different. But not very different. This one’s a middling hard
lot for a duke. When he’s drunk there ain’t no near-sighted man could tell him
from a king.”
“Well, anyways, I doan’ hanker for no mo’ un um, Huck. Dese is all I kin
stan’.”
“It’s the way I feel, too, Jim. But we’ve got them on our hands, and we got to
remember what they are, and make allowances. Sometimes I wish we could
hear of a country that’s out of kings.”
What was the use to tell Jim these warn’t real kings and dukes? It wouldn’t a
done no good; and, besides, it was just as I said: you couldn’t tell them from the
real kind.
I went to sleep, and Jim didn’t call me when it was my turn. He often done
that. When I waked up just at daybreak he was sitting there with his head down
betwixt his knees, moaning and mourning to himself. I didn’t take notice nor let
on. I knowed what it was about. He was thinking about his wife and his
children, away up yonder, and he was low and homesick; because he hadn’t ever
been away from home before in his life; and I do believe he cared just as much
for his people as white folks does for their’n. It don’t seem natural, but I reckon
it’s so. He was often moaning and mourning that way nights, when he judged I
was asleep, and saying, “Po’ little ’Lizabeth! po’ little Johnny! it’s mighty hard; I
spec’ I ain’t ever gwyne to see you no mo’, no mo’!” He was a mighty good
nigger, Jim was.
But this time I somehow got to talking to him about his wife and young ones;
and by and by he says:
“What makes me feel so bad dis time ’uz bekase I hear sumpn over yonder on
de bank like a whack, er a slam, while ago, en it mine me er de time I treat my
little ’Lizabeth so ornery. She warn’t on’y ’bout fo’ year ole, en she tuck de
sk’yarlet fever, en had a powful rough spell; but she got well, en one day she was
a-stannin’ aroun’, en I says to her, I says:
“‘Shet de do’.’
“She never done it; jis’stood dah, kiner smilin’ up at me. It make me mad; en
I says agin, mighty loud, I says:
“‘Doan’ you hear me? Shet de do’!’
“She jis stood de same way, kiner smilin’ up. I was a-bilin’! I says:
“‘I lay I make you mine!’
“En wid dat I fetch’ her a slap side de head dat sont her a-sprawlin’. Den I
went into de yuther room, en ’uz gone ’bout ten minutes; en when I come back
dah was dat do’ a-stannin’ open yit, en dat chile stannin’ mos’ right in it, alookin’ down and mournin’, en de tears runnin’ down. My, but I wuz mad! I was
a-gwyne for de chile, but jis’ den—it was a do’ dat open innerds—jis’ den, ’long
come de wind en slam it to, behine de chile, ker-BLAM!—en my lan’, de chile
never move’! My breff mos’ hop outer me; en I feel so—so—I doan’ know
HOW I feel. I crope out, all a-tremblin’, en crope aroun’ en open de do’ easy en
slow, en poke my head in behine de chile, sof’ en still, en all uv a sudden I says
POW! jis’ as loud as I could yell. She never budge! Oh, Huck, I bust out acryin’ en grab her up in my arms, en say, ‘Oh, de po’ little thing! De Lord God
Amighty fogive po’ ole Jim, kaze he never gwyne to fogive hisself as long’s he
live!’ Oh, she was plumb deef en dumb, Huck, plumb deef en dumb—en I’d ben
a-treat’n her so!”
c24-203.jpg (163K)
CHAPTER XXIV.
NEXT day, towards night, we laid up under a little willow towhead out in the
middle, where there was a village on each side of the river, and the duke and the
king begun to lay out a plan for working them towns. Jim he spoke to the duke,
and said he hoped it wouldn’t take but a few hours, because it got mighty heavy
and tiresome to him when he had to lay all day in the wigwam tied with the rope.
You see, when we left him all alone we had to tie him, because if anybody
happened on to him all by himself and not tied it wouldn’t look much like he
was a runaway nigger, you know. So the duke said it was kind of hard to have to
lay roped all day, and he’d cipher out some way to get around it.
He was uncommon bright, the duke was, and he soon struck it. He dressed
Jim up in King Lear’s outfit—it was a long curtain-calico gown, and a white
horse-hair wig and whiskers; and then he took his theater paint and painted Jim’s
face and hands and ears and neck all over a dead, dull, solid blue, like a man
that’s been drownded nine days. Blamed if he warn’t the horriblest looking
outrage I ever see. Then the duke took and wrote out a sign on a shingle so:
Sick Arab—but harmless when not out of his head.
And he nailed that shingle to a lath, and stood the lath up four or five foot in
front of the wigwam. Jim was satisfied. He said it was a sight better than lying
tied a couple of years every day, and trembling all over every time there was a
sound. The duke told him to make himself free and easy, and if anybody ever
come meddling around, he must hop out of the wigwam, and carry on a little,
and fetch a howl or two like a wild beast, and he reckoned they would light out
and leave him alone. Which was sound enough judgment; but you take the
average man, and he wouldn’t wait for him to howl. Why, he didn’t only look
like he was dead, he looked considerable more than that.
These rapscallions wanted to try the Nonesuch again, because there was so
much money in it, but they judged it wouldn’t be safe, because maybe the news
might a worked along down by this time. They couldn’t hit no project that
suited exactly; so at last the duke said he reckoned he’d lay off and work his
brains an hour or two and see if he couldn’t put up something on the Arkansaw
village; and the king he allowed he would drop over to t’other village without
any plan, but just trust in Providence to lead him the profitable way—meaning
the devil, I reckon. We had all bought store clothes where we stopped last; and
now the king put his’n on, and he told me to put mine on. I done it, of course.
The king’s duds was all black, and he did look real swell and starchy. I never
knowed how clothes could change a body before. Why, before, he looked like
the orneriest old rip that ever was; but now, when he’d take off his new white
beaver and make a bow and do a smile, he looked that grand and good and pious
that you’d say he had walked right out of the ark, and maybe was old Leviticus
himself. Jim cleaned up the canoe, and I got my paddle ready. There was a big
steamboat laying at the shore away up under the point, about three mile above
the town—been there a couple of hours, taking on freight. Says the king:
“Seein’ how I’m dressed, I reckon maybe I better arrive down from St. Louis
or Cincinnati, or some other big place. Go for the steamboat, Huckleberry; we’ll
come down to the village on her.”
I didn’t have to be ordered twice to go and take a steamboat ride. I fetched the
shore a half a mile above the village, and then went scooting along the bluff
bank in the easy water. Pretty soon we come to a nice innocent-looking young
country jake setting on a log swabbing the sweat off of his face, for it was
powerful warm weather; and he had a couple of big carpet-bags by him.
“Run her nose in shore,” says the king. I done it. "Wher’ you bound for,
young man?”
“For the steamboat; going to Orleans.”
“Git aboard,” says the king. "Hold on a minute, my servant ’ll he’p you with
them bags. Jump out and he’p the gentleman, Adolphus”—meaning me, I see.
c24-205.jpg (40K)
I done so, and then we all three started on again. The young chap was mighty
thankful; said it was tough work toting his baggage such weather. He asked the
king where he was going, and the king told him he’d come down the river and
landed at the other village this morning, and now he was going up a few mile to
see an old friend on a farm up there. The young fellow says:
“When I first see you I says to myself, ‘It’s Mr. Wilks, sure, and he come
mighty near getting here in time.’ But then I says again, ‘No, I reckon it ain’t
him, or else he wouldn’t be paddling up the river.’ You ain’t him, are you?”
“No, my name’s Blodgett—Elexander Blodgett—Reverend Elexander
Blodgett, I s’pose I must say, as I’m one o’ the Lord’s poor servants. But still
I’m jist as able to be sorry for Mr. Wilks for not arriving in time, all the same, if
he’s missed anything by it—which I hope he hasn’t.”
“Well, he don’t miss any property by it, because he’ll get that all right; but
he’s missed seeing his brother Peter die—which he mayn’t mind, nobody can tell
as to that—but his brother would a give anything in this world to see him before
he died; never talked about nothing else all these three weeks; hadn’t seen him
since they was boys together—and hadn’t ever seen his brother William at all—
that’s the deef and dumb one—William ain’t more than thirty or thirty-five.
Peter and George were the only ones that come out here; George was the
married brother; him and his wife both died last year. Harvey and William’s the
only ones that’s left now; and, as I was saying, they haven’t got here in time.”
“Did anybody send ’em word?”
“Oh, yes; a month or two ago, when Peter was first took; because Peter said
then that he sorter felt like he warn’t going to get well this time. You see, he was
pretty old, and George’s g’yirls was too young to be much company for him,
except Mary Jane, the red-headed one; and so he was kinder lonesome after
George and his wife died, and didn’t seem to care much to live. He most
desperately wanted to see Harvey—and William, too, for that matter—because
he was one of them kind that can’t bear to make a will. He left a letter behind
for Harvey, and said he’d told in it where his money was hid, and how he wanted
the rest of the property divided up so George’s g’yirls would be all right—for
George didn’t leave nothing. And that letter was all they could get him to put a
pen to.”
“Why do you reckon Harvey don’t come? Wher’ does he live?”
“Oh, he lives in England—Sheffield—preaches there—hasn’t ever been in this
country. He hasn’t had any too much time—and besides he mightn’t a got the
letter at all, you know.”
“Too bad, too bad he couldn’t a lived to see his brothers, poor soul. You going
to Orleans, you say?”
“Yes, but that ain’t only a part of it. I’m going in a ship, next Wednesday, for
Ryo Janeero, where my uncle lives.”
“It’s a pretty long journey. But it’ll be lovely; wisht I was a-going. Is Mary
Jane the oldest? How old is the others?”
“Mary Jane’s nineteen, Susan’s fifteen, and Joanna’s about fourteen—that’s
the one that gives herself to good works and has a hare-lip.”
“Poor things! to be left alone in the cold world so.”
“Well, they could be worse off. Old Peter had friends, and they ain’t going to
let them come to no harm. There’s Hobson, the Babtis’ preacher; and Deacon
Lot Hovey, and Ben Rucker, and Abner Shackleford, and Levi Bell, the lawyer;
and Dr. Robinson, and their wives, and the widow Bartley, and—well, there’s a
lot of them; but these are the ones that Peter was thickest with, and used to write
about sometimes, when he wrote home; so Harvey ’ll know where to look for
friends when he gets here.”
c24-207.jpg (71K)
Well, the old man went on asking questions till he just fairly emptied that
young fellow. Blamed if he didn’t inquire about everybody and everything in
that blessed town, and all about the Wilkses; and about Peter’s business—which
was a tanner; and about George’s—which was a carpenter; and about Harvey’s—
which was a dissentering minister; and so on, and so on. Then he says:
“What did you want to walk all the way up to the steamboat for?”
“Because she’s a big Orleans boat, and I was afeard she mightn’t stop there.
When they’re deep they won’t stop for a hail. A Cincinnati boat will, but this is
a St. Louis one.”
“Was Peter Wilks well off?”
“Oh, yes, pretty well off. He had houses and land, and it’s reckoned he left
three or four thousand in cash hid up som’ers.”
“When did you say he died?”
“I didn’t say, but it was last night.”
“Funeral to-morrow, likely?”
“Yes, ’bout the middle of the day.”
“Well, it’s all terrible sad; but we’ve all got to go, one time or another. So
what we want to do is to be prepared; then we’re all right.”
“Yes, sir, it’s the best way. Ma used to always say that.”
When we struck the boat she was about done loading, and pretty soon she got
off. The king never said nothing about going aboard, so I lost my ride, after all.
When the boat was gone the king made me paddle up another mile to a
lonesome place, and then he got ashore and says:
“Now hustle back, right off, and fetch the duke up here, and the new carpetbags. And if he’s gone over to t’other side, go over there and git him. And tell
him to git himself up regardless. Shove along, now.”
I see what he was up to; but I never said nothing, of course. When I got back
with the duke we hid the canoe, and then they set down on a log, and the king
told him everything, just like the young fellow had said it—every last word of it.
And all the time he was a-doing it he tried to talk like an Englishman; and he
done it pretty well, too, for a slouch. I can’t imitate him, and so I ain’t a-going to
try to; but he really done it pretty good. Then he says:
“How are you on the deef and dumb, Bilgewater?”
The duke said, leave him alone for that; said he had played a deef and dumb
person on the histronic boards. So then they waited for a steamboat.
About the middle of the afternoon a couple of little boats come along, but they
didn’t come from high enough up the river; but at last there was a big one, and
they hailed her. She sent out her yawl, and we went aboard, and she was from
Cincinnati; and when they found we only wanted to go four or five mile they
was booming mad, and gave us a cussing, and said they wouldn’t land us. But
the king was ca’m. He says:
“If gentlemen kin afford to pay a dollar a mile apiece to be took on and put off
in a yawl, a steamboat kin afford to carry ’em, can’t it?”
So they softened down and said it was all right; and when we got to the village
they yawled us ashore. About two dozen men flocked down when they see the
yawl a-coming, and when the king says:
“Kin any of you gentlemen tell me wher’ Mr. Peter Wilks lives?” they give a
glance at one another, and nodded their heads, as much as to say, “What d’ I tell
you?” Then one of them says, kind of soft and gentle:
“I’m sorry sir, but the best we can do is to tell you where he did live yesterday
evening.”
Sudden as winking the ornery old cretur went an to smash, and fell up against
the man, and put his chin on his shoulder, and cried down his back, and says:
“Alas, alas, our poor brother—gone, and we never got to see him; oh, it’s too,
too hard!”
c24-209.jpg (56K)
Then he turns around, blubbering, and makes a lot of idiotic signs to the duke
on his hands, and blamed if he didn’t drop a carpet-bag and bust out a-crying. If
they warn’t the beatenest lot, them two frauds, that ever I struck.
Well, the men gathered around and sympathized with them, and said all sorts
of kind things to them, and carried their carpet-bags up the hill for them, and let
them lean on them and cry, and told the king all about his brother’s last
moments, and the king he told it all over again on his hands to the duke, and
both of them took on about that dead tanner like they’d lost the twelve disciples.
Well, if ever I struck anything like it, I’m a nigger. It was enough to make a
body ashamed of the human race.
c25-211.jpg (156K)
CHAPTER XXV.
THE news was all over town in two minutes, and you could see the people
tearing down on the run from every which way, some of them putting on their
coats as they come. Pretty soon we was in the middle of a crowd, and the noise
of the tramping was like a soldier march. The windows and dooryards was full;
and every minute somebody would say, over a fence:
“Is it them?”
And somebody trotting along with the gang would answer back and say:
“You bet it is.”
When we got to the house the street in front of it was packed, and the three
girls was standing in the door. Mary Jane was red-headed, but that don’t make
no difference, she was most awful beautiful, and her face and her eyes was all lit
up like glory, she was so glad her uncles was come. The king he spread his arms,
and Mary Jane she jumped for them, and the hare-lip jumped for the duke, and
there they had it! Everybody most, leastways women, cried for joy to see them
meet again at last and have such good times.
Then the king he hunched the duke private—I see him do it—and then he
looked around and see the coffin, over in the corner on two chairs; so then him
and the duke, with a hand across each other’s shoulder, and t’other hand to their
eyes, walked slow and solemn over there, everybody dropping back to give them
room, and all the talk and noise stopping, people saying “Sh!” and all the men
taking their hats off and drooping their heads, so you could a heard a pin fall.
And when they got there they bent over and looked in the coffin, and took one
sight, and then they bust out a-crying so you could a heard them to Orleans,
most; and then they put their arms around each other’s necks, and hung their
chins over each other’s shoulders; and then for three minutes, or maybe four, I
never see two men leak the way they done. And, mind you, everybody was
doing the same; and the place was that damp I never see anything like it. Then
one of them got on one side of the coffin, and t’other on t’other side, and they
kneeled down and rested their foreheads on the coffin, and let on to pray all to
themselves. Well, when it come to that it worked the crowd like you never see
anything like it, and everybody broke down and went to sobbing right out loud—
the poor girls, too; and every woman, nearly, went up to the girls, without saying
a word, and kissed them, solemn, on the forehead, and then put their hand on
their head, and looked up towards the sky, with the tears running down, and then
busted out and went off sobbing and swabbing, and give the next woman a show.
I never see anything so disgusting.
c25-212.jpg (44K)
Well, by and by the king he gets up and comes forward a little, and works
himself up and slobbers out a speech, all full of tears and flapdoodle about its
being a sore trial for him and his poor brother to lose the diseased, and to miss
seeing diseased alive after the long journey of four thousand mile, but it’s a trial
that’s sweetened and sanctified to us by this dear sympathy and these holy tears,
and so he thanks them out of his heart and out of his brother’s heart, because out
of their mouths they can’t, words being too weak and cold, and all that kind of
rot and slush, till it was just sickening; and then he blubbers out a pious goodygoody Amen, and turns himself loose and goes to crying fit to bust.
And the minute the words were out of his mouth somebody over in the crowd
struck up the doxolojer, and everybody joined in with all their might, and it just
warmed you up and made you feel as good as church letting out. Music is a good
thing; and after all that soul-butter and hogwash I never see it freshen up things
so, and sound so honest and bully.
Then the king begins to work his jaw again, and says how him and his nieces
would be glad if a few of the main principal friends of the family would take
supper here with them this evening, and help set up with the ashes of the
diseased; and says if his poor brother laying yonder could speak he knows who
he would name, for they was names that was very dear to him, and mentioned
often in his letters; and so he will name the same, to wit, as follows, vizz.:—Rev.
Mr. Hobson, and Deacon Lot Hovey, and Mr. Ben Rucker, and Abner
Shackleford, and Levi Bell, and Dr. Robinson, and their wives, and the widow
Bartley.
Rev. Hobson and Dr. Robinson was down to the end of the town a-hunting
together—that is, I mean the doctor was shipping a sick man to t’other world,
and the preacher was pinting him right. Lawyer Bell was away up to Louisville
on business. But the rest was on hand, and so they all come and shook hands
with the king and thanked him and talked to him; and then they shook hands
with the duke and didn’t say nothing, but just kept a-smiling and bobbing their
heads like a passel of sapheads whilst he made all sorts of signs with his hands
and said “Goo-goo—goo-goo-goo” all the time, like a baby that can’t talk.
So the king he blattered along, and managed to inquire about pretty much
everybody and dog in town, by his name, and mentioned all sorts of little things
that happened one time or another in the town, or to George’s family, or to Peter.
And he always let on that Peter wrote him the things; but that was a lie: he got
every blessed one of them out of that young flathead that we canoed up to the
steamboat.
Then Mary Jane she fetched the letter her father left behind, and the king he
read it out loud and cried over it. It give the dwelling-house and three thousand
dollars, gold, to the girls; and it give the tanyard (which was doing a good
business), along with some other houses and land (worth about seven thousand),
and three thousand dollars in gold to Harvey and William, and told where the six
thousand cash was hid down cellar. So these two frauds said they’d go and fetch
it up, and have everything square and above-board; and told me to come with a
candle. We shut the cellar door behind us, and when they found the bag they
spilt it out on the floor, and it was a lovely sight, all them yaller-boys. My, the
way the king’s eyes did shine! He slaps the duke on the shoulder and says:
“Oh, this ain’t bully nor noth’n! Oh, no, I reckon not! Why, bully, it beats the
Nonesuch, don’t it?”
The duke allowed it did. They pawed the yaller-boys, and sifted them through
their fingers and let them jingle down on the floor; and the king says:
“It ain’t no use talkin’; bein’ brothers to a rich dead man and representatives of
furrin heirs that’s got left is the line for you and me, Bilge. Thish yer comes of
trust’n to Providence. It’s the best way, in the long run. I’ve tried ’em all, and
ther’ ain’t no better way.”
Most everybody would a been satisfied with the pile, and took it on trust; but
no, they must count it. So they counts it, and it comes out four hundred and
fifteen dollars short. Says the king:
“Dern him, I wonder what he done with that four hundred and fifteen
dollars?”
They worried over that awhile, and ransacked all around for it. Then the duke
says:
“Well, he was a pretty sick man, and likely he made a mistake—I reckon
that’s the way of it. The best way’s to let it go, and keep still about it. We can
spare it.”
“Oh, shucks, yes, we can spare it. I don’t k’yer noth’n ’bout that—it’s the
count I’m thinkin’ about. We want to be awful square and open and above-board
here, you know. We want to lug this h-yer money up stairs and count it before
everybody—then ther’ ain’t noth’n suspicious. But when the dead man says
ther’s six thous’n dollars, you know, we don’t want to—”
“Hold on,” says the duke. "Le’s make up the deffisit,” and he begun to haul
out yaller-boys out of his pocket.
c25-215.jpg (64K)
“It’s a most amaz’n’ good idea, duke—you have got a rattlin’ clever head on
you,” says the king. "Blest if the old Nonesuch ain’t a heppin’ us out agin,” and
he begun to haul out yaller-jackets and stack them up.
It most busted them, but they made up the six thousand clean and clear.
“Say,” says the duke, “I got another idea. Le’s go up stairs and count this
money, and then take and give it to the girls.”
“Good land, duke, lemme hug you! It’s the most dazzling idea ’at ever a man
struck. You have cert’nly got the most astonishin’ head I ever see. Oh, this is the
boss dodge, ther’ ain’t no mistake ’bout it. Let ’em fetch along their suspicions
now if they want to—this ’ll lay ’em out.”
When we got up-stairs everybody gethered around the table, and the king he
counted it and stacked it up, three hundred dollars in a pile—twenty elegant little
piles. Everybody looked hungry at it, and licked their chops. Then they raked it
into the bag again, and I see the king begin to swell himself up for another
speech. He says:
“Friends all, my poor brother that lays yonder has done generous by them
that’s left behind in the vale of sorrers. He has done generous by these yer poor
little lambs that he loved and sheltered, and that’s left fatherless and motherless.
Yes, and we that knowed him knows that he would a done more generous by
’em if he hadn’t ben afeard o’ woundin’ his dear William and me. Now, wouldn’t
he? Ther’ ain’t no question ’bout it in my mind. Well, then, what kind o’
brothers would it be that ’d stand in his way at sech a time? And what kind o’
uncles would it be that ’d rob—yes, rob—sech poor sweet lambs as these ’at he
loved so at sech a time? If I know William—and I think I do—he—well, I’ll jest
ask him.” He turns around and begins to make a lot of signs to the duke with his
hands, and the duke he looks at him stupid and leather-headed a while; then all
of a sudden he seems to catch his meaning, and jumps for the king, goo-gooing
with all his might for joy, and hugs him about fifteen times before he lets up.
Then the king says, “I knowed it; I reckon that ’ll convince anybody the way he
feels about it. Here, Mary Jane, Susan, Joanner, take the money—take it all. It’s
the gift of him that lays yonder, cold but joyful.”
c25-216.jpg (55K)
Mary Jane she went for him, Susan and the hare-lip went for the duke, and
then such another hugging and kissing I never see yet. And everybody crowded
up with the tears in their eyes, and most shook the hands off of them frauds,
saying all the time:
“You dear good souls!—how lovely!—how could you!”
Well, then, pretty soon all hands got to talking about the diseased again, and
how good he was, and what a loss he was, and all that; and before long a big
iron-jawed man worked himself in there from outside, and stood a-listening and
looking, and not saying anything; and nobody saying anything to him either,
because the king was talking and they was all busy listening. The king was
saying—in the middle of something he’d started in on—
“—they bein’ partickler friends o’ the diseased. That’s why they’re invited
here this evenin’; but tomorrow we want all to come—everybody; for he
respected everybody, he liked everybody, and so it’s fitten that his funeral orgies
sh’d be public.”
And so he went a-mooning on and on, liking to hear himself talk, and every
little while he fetched in his funeral orgies again, till the duke he couldn’t stand it
no more; so he writes on a little scrap of paper, “Obsequies, you old fool,” and
folds it up, and goes to goo-gooing and reaching it over people’s heads to him.
The king he reads it and puts it in his pocket, and says:
“Poor William, afflicted as he is, his heart’s aluz right. Asks me to invite
everybody to come to the funeral—wants me to make ’em all welcome. But he
needn’t a worried—it was jest what I was at.”
Then he weaves along again, perfectly ca’m, and goes to dropping in his
funeral orgies again every now and then, just like he done before. And when he
done it the third time he says:
“I say orgies, not because it’s the common term, because it ain’t—obsequies
bein’ the common term—but because orgies is the right term. Obsequies ain’t
used in England no more now—it’s gone out. We say orgies now in England.
Orgies is better, because it means the thing you’re after more exact. It’s a word
that’s made up out’n the Greek orgo, outside, open, abroad; and the Hebrew
jeesum, to plant, cover up; hence inter. So, you see, funeral orgies is an open er
public funeral.”
He was the worst I ever struck. Well, the iron-jawed man he laughed right in
his face. Everybody was shocked. Everybody says, “Why, doctor!” and Abner
Shackleford says:
“Why, Robinson, hain’t you heard the news? This is Harvey Wilks.”
The king he smiled eager, and shoved out his flapper, and says:
“Is it my poor brother’s dear good friend and physician? I—”
“Keep your hands off of me!” says the doctor. “You talk like an Englishman,
don’t you? It’s the worst imitation I ever heard. You Peter Wilks’s brother!
You’re a fraud, that’s what you are!”
c25-218.jpg (35K)
Well, how they all took on! They crowded around the doctor and tried to
quiet him down, and tried to explain to him and tell him how Harvey ’d showed
in forty ways that he was Harvey, and knowed everybody by name, and the
names of the very dogs, and begged and begged him not to hurt Harvey’s
feelings and the poor girl’s feelings, and all that. But it warn’t no use; he
stormed right along, and said any man that pretended to be an Englishman and
couldn’t imitate the lingo no better than what he did was a fraud and a liar. The
poor girls was hanging to the king and crying; and all of a sudden the doctor ups
and turns on them. He says:
“I was your father’s friend, and I’m your friend; and I warn you as a friend,
and an honest one that wants to protect you and keep you out of harm and
trouble, to turn your backs on that scoundrel and have nothing to do with him,
the ignorant tramp, with his idiotic Greek and Hebrew, as he calls it. He is the
thinnest kind of an impostor—has come here with a lot of empty names and facts
which he picked up somewheres, and you take them for proofs, and are helped to
fool yourselves by these foolish friends here, who ought to know better. Mary
Jane Wilks, you know me for your friend, and for your unselfish friend, too.
Now listen to me; turn this pitiful rascal out—I beg you to do it. Will you?”
Mary Jane straightened herself up, and my, but she was handsome! She says:
“Here is my answer.” She hove up the bag of money and put it in the king’s
hands, and says, “Take this six thousand dollars, and invest for me and my sisters
any way you want to, and don’t give us no receipt for it.”
Then she put her arm around the king on one side, and Susan and the hare-lip
done the same on the other. Everybody clapped their hands and stomped on the
floor like a perfect storm, whilst the king held up his head and smiled proud.
The doctor says:
“All right; I wash my hands of the matter. But I warn you all that a time ’s
coming when you’re going to feel sick whenever you think of this day.” And
away he went.
“All right, doctor,” says the king, kinder mocking him; “we’ll try and get ’em
to send for you;” which made them all laugh, and they said it was a prime good
hit.
c25-219.jpg (24K)
c26-220.jpg (168K)
CHAPTER XXVI.
WELL, when they was all gone the king he asks Mary Jane how they was off
for spare rooms, and she said she had one spare room, which would do for Uncle
William, and she’d give her own room to Uncle Harvey, which was a little
bigger, and she would turn into the room with her sisters and sleep on a cot; and
up garret was a little cubby, with a pallet in it. The king said the cubby would do
for his valley—meaning me.
So Mary Jane took us up, and she showed them their rooms, which was plain
but nice. She said she’d have her frocks and a lot of other traps took out of her
room if they was in Uncle Harvey’s way, but he said they warn’t. The frocks
was hung along the wall, and before them was a curtain made out of calico that
hung down to the floor. There was an old hair trunk in one corner, and a guitarbox in another, and all sorts of little knickknacks and jimcracks around, like girls
brisken up a room with. The king said it was all the more homely and more
pleasanter for these fixings, and so don’t disturb them. The duke’s room was
pretty small, but plenty good enough, and so was my cubby.
That night they had a big supper, and all them men and women was there, and
I stood behind the king and the duke’s chairs and waited on them, and the
niggers waited on the rest. Mary Jane she set at the head of the table, with Susan
alongside of her, and said how bad the biscuits was, and how mean the preserves
was, and how ornery and tough the fried chickens was—and all that kind of rot,
the way women always do for to force out compliments; and the people all
knowed everything was tiptop, and said so—said “How do you get biscuits to
brown so nice?” and “Where, for the land’s sake, did you get these amaz’n
pickles?” and all that kind of humbug talky-talk, just the way people always does
at a supper, you know.
c26-221.jpg (54K)
And when it was all done me and the hare-lip had supper in the kitchen off of
the leavings, whilst the others was helping the niggers clean up the things. The
hare-lip she got to pumping me about England, and blest if I didn’t think the ice
was getting mighty thin sometimes. She says:
“Did you ever see the king?”
“Who? William Fourth? Well, I bet I have—he goes to our church.” I
knowed he was dead years ago, but I never let on. So when I says he goes to our
church, she says:
“What—regular?”
“Yes—regular. His pew’s right over opposite ourn—on t’other side the
pulpit.”
“I thought he lived in London?”
“Well, he does. Where would he live?”
“But I thought you lived in Sheffield?”
I see I was up a stump. I had to let on to get choked with a chicken bone, so
as to get time to think how to get down again. Then I says:
“I mean he goes to our church regular when he’s in Sheffield. That’s only in
the summer time, when he comes there to take the sea baths.”
“Why, how you talk—Sheffield ain’t on the sea.”
“Well, who said it was?”
“Why, you did.”
“I didn’t nuther.”
“You did!”
“I didn’t.”
“You did.”
“I never said nothing of the kind.”
“Well, what did you say, then?”
“Said he come to take the sea baths—that’s what I said.”
“Well, then, how’s he going to take the sea baths if it ain’t on the sea?”
“Looky here,” I says; “did you ever see any Congress-water?”
“Yes.”
“Well, did you have to go to Congress to get it?”
“Why, no.”
“Well, neither does William Fourth have to go to the sea to get a sea bath.”
“How does he get it, then?”
“Gets it the way people down here gets Congress-water—in barrels. There in
the palace at Sheffield they’ve got furnaces, and he wants his water hot. They
can’t bile that amount of water away off there at the sea. They haven’t got no
conveniences for it.”
“Oh, I see, now. You might a said that in the first place and saved time.”
When she said that I see I was out of the woods again, and so I was
comfortable and glad. Next, she says:
“Do you go to church, too?”
“Yes—regular.”
“Where do you set?”
“Why, in our pew.”
“Whose pew?”
“Why, ourn—your Uncle Harvey’s.”
“His’n? What does he want with a pew?”
“Wants it to set in. What did you reckon he wanted with it?”
“Why, I thought he’d be in the pulpit.”
Rot him, I forgot he was a preacher. I see I was up a stump again, so I played
another chicken bone and got another think. Then I says:
“Blame it, do you suppose there ain’t but one preacher to a church?”
“Why, what do they want with more?”
“What!—to preach before a king? I never did see such a girl as you. They
don’t have no less than seventeen.”
“Seventeen! My land! Why, I wouldn’t set out such a string as that, not if I
never got to glory. It must take ’em a week.”
“Shucks, they don’t all of ’em preach the same day—only one of ’em.”
“Well, then, what does the rest of ’em do?”
“Oh, nothing much. Loll around, pass the plate—and one thing or another.
But mainly they don’t do nothing.”
“Well, then, what are they for?”
“Why, they’re for style. Don’t you know nothing?”
“Well, I don’t want to know no such foolishness as that. How is servants
treated in England? Do they treat ’em better ’n we treat our niggers?”
“No! A servant ain’t nobody there. They treat them worse than dogs.”
“Don’t they give ’em holidays, the way we do, Christmas and New Year’s
week, and Fourth of July?”
“Oh, just listen! A body could tell you hain’t ever been to England by that.
Why, Hare-l—why, Joanna, they never see a holiday from year’s end to year’s
end; never go to the circus, nor theater, nor nigger shows, nor nowheres.”
“Nor church?”
“Nor church.”
“But you always went to church.”
Well, I was gone up again. I forgot I was the old man’s servant. But next
minute I whirled in on a kind of an explanation how a valley was different from
a common servant and had to go to church whether he wanted to or not, and set
with the family, on account of its being the law. But I didn’t do it pretty good,
and when I got done I see she warn’t satisfied. She says:
“Honest injun, now, hain’t you been telling me a lot of lies?”
c26-224.jpg (63K)
“Honest injun,” says I.
“None of it at all?”
“None of it at all. Not a lie in it,” says I.
“Lay your hand on this book and say it.”
I see it warn’t nothing but a dictionary, so I laid my hand on it and said it. So
then she looked a little better satisfied, and says:
“Well, then, I’ll believe some of it; but I hope to gracious if I’ll believe the
rest.”
“What is it you won’t believe, Joe?” says Mary Jane, stepping in with Susan
behind her. "It ain’t right nor kind for you to talk so to him, and him a stranger
and so far from his people. How would you like to be treated so?”
“That’s always your way, Maim—always sailing in to help somebody before
they’re hurt. I hain’t done nothing to him. He’s told some stretchers, I reckon,
and I said I wouldn’t swallow it all; and that’s every bit and grain I did say. I
reckon he can stand a little thing like that, can’t he?”
“I don’t care whether ’twas little or whether ’twas big; he’s here in our house
and a stranger, and it wasn’t good of you to say it. If you was in his place it
would make you feel ashamed; and so you oughtn’t to say a thing to another
person that will make them feel ashamed.”
“Why, Mam, he said—”
“It don’t make no difference what he said—that ain’t the thing. The thing is
for you to treat him kind, and not be saying things to make him remember he
ain’t in his own country and amongst his own folks.”
I says to myself, this is a girl that I’m letting that old reptile rob her of her
money!
Then Susan she waltzed in; and if you’ll believe me, she did give Hare-lip
hark from the tomb!
Says I to myself, and this is another one that I’m letting him rob her of her
money!
Then Mary Jane she took another inning, and went in sweet and lovely again
—which was her way; but when she got done there warn’t hardly anything left o’
poor Hare-lip. So she hollered.
“All right, then,” says the other girls; “you just ask his pardon.”
She done it, too; and she done it beautiful. She done it so beautiful it was
good to hear; and I wished I could tell her a thousand lies, so she could do it
again.
I says to myself, this is another one that I’m letting him rob her of her money.
And when she got through they all jest laid theirselves out to make me feel at
home and know I was amongst friends. I felt so ornery and low down and mean
that I says to myself, my mind’s made up; I’ll hive that money for them or bust.
So then I lit out—for bed, I said, meaning some time or another. When I got
by myself I went to thinking the thing over. I says to myself, shall I go to that
doctor, private, and blow on these frauds? No—that won’t do. He might tell
who told him; then the king and the duke would make it warm for me. Shall I
go, private, and tell Mary Jane? No—I dasn’t do it. Her face would give them a
hint, sure; they’ve got the money, and they’d slide right out and get away with it.
If she was to fetch in help I’d get mixed up in the business before it was done
with, I judge. No; there ain’t no good way but one. I got to steal that money,
somehow; and I got to steal it some way that they won’t suspicion that I done it.
They’ve got a good thing here, and they ain’t a-going to leave till they’ve played
this family and this town for all they’re worth, so I’ll find a chance time enough.
I’ll steal it and hide it; and by and by, when I’m away down the river, I’ll write a
letter and tell Mary Jane where it’s hid. But I better hive it tonight if I can,
because the doctor maybe hasn’t let up as much as he lets on he has; he might
scare them out of here yet.
So, thinks I, I’ll go and search them rooms. Upstairs the hall was dark, but I
found the duke’s room, and started to paw around it with my hands; but I
recollected it wouldn’t be much like the king to let anybody else take care of that
money but his own self; so then I went to his room and begun to paw around
there. But I see I couldn’t do nothing without a candle, and I dasn’t light one, of
course. So I judged I’d got to do the other thing—lay for them and eavesdrop.
About that time I hears their footsteps coming, and was going to skip under the
bed; I reached for it, but it wasn’t where I thought it would be; but I touched the
curtain that hid Mary Jane’s frocks, so I jumped in behind that and snuggled in
amongst the gowns, and stood there perfectly still.
c26-226.jpg (73K)
They come in and shut the door; and the first thing the duke done was to get
down and look under the bed. Then I was glad I hadn’t found the bed when I
wanted it. And yet, you know, it’s kind of natural to hide under the bed when
you are up to anything private. They sets down then, and the king says:
“Well, what is it? And cut it middlin’ short, because it’s better for us to be
down there a-whoopin’ up the mournin’ than up here givin’ ’em a chance to talk
us over.”
“Well, this is it, Capet. I ain’t easy; I ain’t comfortable. That doctor lays on
my mind. I wanted to know your plans. I’ve got a notion, and I think it’s a
sound one.”
“What is it, duke?”
“That we better glide out of this before three in the morning, and clip it down
the river with what we’ve got. Specially, seeing we got it so easy—given back to
us, flung at our heads, as you may say, when of course we allowed to have to
steal it back. I’m for knocking off and lighting out.”
That made me feel pretty bad. About an hour or two ago it would a been a
little different, but now it made me feel bad and disappointed, The king rips out
and says:
“What! And not sell out the rest o’ the property? March off like a passel of
fools and leave eight or nine thous’n’ dollars’ worth o’ property layin’ around jest
sufferin’ to be scooped in?—and all good, salable stuff, too.”
The duke he grumbled; said the bag of gold was enough, and he didn’t want to
go no deeper—didn’t want to rob a lot of orphans of everything they had.
“Why, how you talk!” says the king. "We sha’n’t rob ’em of nothing at all but
jest this money. The people that buys the property is the suff’rers; because as
soon ’s it’s found out ’at we didn’t own it—which won’t be long after we’ve slid
—the sale won’t be valid, and it ’ll all go back to the estate. These yer orphans
’ll git their house back agin, and that’s enough for them; they’re young and spry,
and k’n easy earn a livin’. they ain’t a-goin to suffer. Why, jest think—there’s
thous’n’s and thous’n’s that ain’t nigh so well off. Bless you, they ain’t got
noth’n’ to complain of.”
Well, the king he talked him blind; so at last he give in, and said all right, but
said he believed it was blamed foolishness to stay, and that doctor hanging over
them. But the king says:
“Cuss the doctor! What do we k’yer for him? Hain’t we got all the fools in
town on our side? And ain’t that a big enough majority in any town?”
So they got ready to go down stairs again. The duke says:
“I don’t think we put that money in a good place.”
That cheered me up. I’d begun to think I warn’t going to get a hint of no kind
to help me. The king says:
“Why?”
“Because Mary Jane ’ll be in mourning from this out; and first you know the
nigger that does up the rooms will get an order to box these duds up and put ’em
away; and do you reckon a nigger can run across money and not borrow some of
it?”
“Your head’s level agin, duke,” says the king; and he comes a-fumbling under
the curtain two or three foot from where I was. I stuck tight to the wall and kept
mighty still, though quivery; and I wondered what them fellows would say to me
if they catched me; and I tried to think what I’d better do if they did catch me.
But the king he got the bag before I could think more than about a half a
thought, and he never suspicioned I was around. They took and shoved the bag
through a rip in the straw tick that was under the feather-bed, and crammed it in
a foot or two amongst the straw and said it was all right now, because a nigger
only makes up the feather-bed, and don’t turn over the straw tick only about
twice a year, and so it warn’t in no danger of getting stole now.
c26-229.jpg (72K)