"The deepest parts of the ocean are totally unknown to us,"
admits Professor Aronnax early in this novel. "What goes on in
those distant depths? What creatures inhabit, or could inhabit,
those regions twelve or fifteen miles beneath the surface of the water?
It's almost beyond conjecture."
Jules Verne (1828-1905) published the French equivalents of these words
in 1869, and little has changed since. 126 years later, a Time
cover story on deep-sea exploration made much the same admission:
"We know more about Mars than we know about the oceans."
This reality begins to explain the dark power and otherworldly
fascination of Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas.
Born in the French river town of Nantes, Verne had a lifelong
passion for the sea. First as a Paris stockbroker, later as a
celebrated author and yachtsman, he went on frequent voyages--
to Britain, America, the Mediterranean. But the specific stimulus
for this novel was an 1865 fan letter from a fellow writer,
Madame George Sand. She praised Verne's two early novels Five Weeks
in a Balloon (1863) and Journey to the Center of the Earth
(1864), then added: "Soon I hope you'll take us into the ocean depths,
your characters traveling in diving equipment perfected by your
science and your imagination." Thus inspired, Verne created one
of literature's great rebels, a freedom fighter who plunged beneath
the waves to wage a unique form of guerilla warfare.
Initially, Verne's narrative was influenced by the 1863 uprising of
Poland against Tsarist Russia. The Poles were quashed with a violence
that appalled not only Verne but all Europe. As originally conceived,
Verne's Captain Nemo was a Polish nobleman whose entire family
had been slaughtered by Russian troops. Nemo builds a fabulous
futuristic submarine, the Nautilus, then conducts an underwater
campaign of vengeance against his imperialist oppressor.
But in the 1860s France had to treat the Tsar as an ally,
and Verne's publisher Pierre Hetzel pronounced the book unprintable.
Verne reworked its political content, devising new nationalities for
Nemo and his great enemy--information revealed only in a later novel,
The Mysterious Island (1875); in the present work Nemo's background
remains a dark secret. In all, the novel had a difficult gestation.
Verne and Hetzel were in constant conflict and the book went
through multiple drafts, struggles reflected in its several
working titles over the period 1865-69: early on, it was variously
called Voyage Under the Waters, Twenty-five Thousand Leagues Under
the Waters, Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Waters,
and A Thousand Leagues Under the Oceans.
Verne is often dubbed, in Isaac Asimov's phrase, "the world's
first science-fiction writer." And it's true, many of his
sixty-odd books do anticipate future events and technologies:
From the Earth to the Moon (1865) and Hector Servadac (1877) deal
in space travel, while Journey to the Center
5
of the Earth features travel to the earth's core. But with Verne
the operative word is "travel," and some of his best-known titles
don't really qualify as sci-fi: Around the World in Eighty Days
(1872) and Michael Strogoff (1876) are closer to "travelogs"--
adventure yarns in far-away places.
These observations partly apply here. The subtitle of the present
book is An Underwater Tour of the World, so in good travelog style,
the Nautilus's exploits supply an episodic story line.
Shark attacks, giant squid, cannibals, hurricanes, whale hunts,
and other rip-roaring adventures erupt almost at random. Yet this loose
structure gives the novel an air of documentary realism. What's more,
Verne adds backbone to the action by developing three recurring motifs:
the deepening mystery of Nemo's past life and future intentions,
the mounting tension between Nemo and hot-tempered harpooner Ned Land,
and Ned's ongoing schemes to escape from the Nautilus. These unifying
threads tighten the narrative and accelerate its momentum.
Other subtleties occur inside each episode, the textures sparkling
with wit, information, and insight. Verne regards the sea from
many angles: in the domain of marine biology, he gives us thumbnail
sketches of fish, seashells, coral, sometimes in great catalogs
that swirl past like musical cascades; in the realm of geology,
he studies volcanoes literally inside and out; in the world of commerce,
he celebrates the high-energy entrepreneurs who lay the Atlantic Cable
or dig the Suez Canal. And Verne's marine engineering proves
especially authoritative. His specifications for an open-sea submarine
and a self-contained diving suit were decades before their time,
yet modern technology bears them out triumphantly.
True, today's scientists know a few things he didn't: the South Pole
isn't at the water's edge but far inland; sharks don't flip
over before attacking; giant squid sport ten tentacles not eight;
sperm whales don't prey on their whalebone cousins. This notwithstanding,
Verne furnishes the most evocative portrayal of the ocean depths
before the arrival of Jacques Cousteau and technicolor film.
Lastly the book has stature as a novel of character. Even the
supporting cast is shrewdly drawn: Professor Aronnax, the career
scientist caught in an ethical conflict; Conseil, the compulsive
classifier who supplies humorous tag lines for Verne's fast facts;
the harpooner Ned Land, a creature of constant appetites,
man as heroic animal.
But much of the novel's brooding power comes from Captain Nemo.
Inventor, musician, Renaissance genius, he's a trail-blazing creation,
the prototype not only for countless renegade scientists in
popular fiction, but even for such varied figures as Sherlock Holmes
or Wolf Larsen. However, Verne gives his hero's brilliance
and benevolence a dark underside--the man's obsessive hate for his
old enemy. This compulsion leads Nemo into ugly contradictions:
he's a fighter for freedom, yet all who board his ship are imprisoned
there for good; he works to save lives, both human and animal,
yet he himself creates a holocaust; he detests imperialism,
yet he lays personal claim to the South Pole. And in this last action
he falls into the classic sin of Pride. He's swiftly punished.
The Nautilus nearly perishes in the Antarctic and Nemo sinks into
a growing depression.
Like Shakespeare's King Lear he courts death and madness in a great storm,
6
then commits mass murder, collapses in catatonic paralysis,
and suicidally runs his ship into the ocean's most dangerous whirlpool.
Hate swallows him whole.
For many, then, this book has been a source of fascination,
surely one of the most influential novels ever written, an inspiration
for such scientists and discoverers as engineer Simon Lake,
oceanographer William Beebe, polar traveler Sir Ernest Shackleton.
Likewise Dr. Robert D. Ballard, finder of the sunken Titanic,
confesses that this was his favorite book as a teenager,
and Cousteau himself, most renowned of marine explorers, called it
his shipboard bible.
The present translation is a faithful yet communicative rendering
of the original French texts published in Paris by J. Hetzel et Cie.--
the hardcover first edition issued in the autumn of 1871,
collated with the softcover editions of the First and Second Parts
issued separately in the autumn of 1869 and the summer of 1870.
Although prior English versions have often been heavily abridged,
this new translation is complete to the smallest substantive detail.
Because, as that Time cover story suggests, we still haven't caught
up with Verne. Even in our era of satellite dishes and video games,
the seas keep their secrets. We've seen progress in sonar, torpedoes,
and other belligerent machinery, but sailors and scientists--
to say nothing of tourists--have yet to voyage in a submarine
with the luxury and efficiency of the Nautilus.
F. P. WALTER
University of Houston
7
Units of Measure
CABLE LENGTH In Verne's context, 600 feet
CENTIGRADE 0 degrees centigrade = freezing water
37 degrees centigrade = human body temperature
100 degrees centigrade = boiling water
FATHOM 6 feet
GRAM Roughly 1/28 of an ounce
- MILLIGRAM Roughly 1/28,000 of an ounce
- KILOGRAM (KILO) Roughly 2.2 pounds
HECTARE Roughly 2.5 acres
KNOT 1.15 miles per hour
LEAGUE In Verne's context, 2.16 miles
LITER Roughly 1 quart
METER Roughly 1 yard, 3 inches
- MILLIMETER Roughly 1/25 of an inch
- CENTIMETER Roughly 2/5 of an inch
- DECIMETER Roughly 4 inches
- KILOMETER Roughly 6/10 of a mile
- MYRIAMETER Roughly 6.2 miles
TON, METRIC Roughly 2,200 pounds viii
8
FIRST PART
___________________________________________________________________
CHAPTER 1
A Runaway Reef
THE YEAR 1866 was marked by a bizarre development, an unexplained
and downright inexplicable phenomenon that surely no one has forgotten.
Without getting into those rumors that upset civilians
in the seaports and deranged the public mind even far inland,
it must be said that professional seamen were especially alarmed.
Traders, shipowners, captains of vessels, skippers, and master mariners
from Europe and America, naval officers from every country, and at
their heels the various national governments on these two continents,
were all extremely disturbed by the business.
In essence, over a period of time several ships had encountered
"an enormous thing" at sea, a long spindle-shaped object,
sometimes giving off a phosphorescent glow, infinitely bigger
and faster than any whale.
The relevant data on this apparition, as recorded in various logbooks,
agreed pretty closely as to the structure of the object or creature
in question, its unprecedented speed of movement, its startling
locomotive power, and the unique vitality with which it seemed
to be gifted. If it was a cetacean, it exceeded in bulk any whale
previously classified by science. No naturalist, neither Cuvier nor
Lacépède, neither Professor Dumeril nor Professor de Quatrefages,
would have accepted the existence of such a monster sight unseen--
specifically, unseen by their own scientific eyes.
Striking an average of observations taken at different times--
rejecting those timid estimates that gave the object a length
of 200 feet, and ignoring those exaggerated views that saw it
as a mile wide and three long--you could still assert that this
phenomenal creature greatly exceeded the dimensions of anything
then known to ichthyologists, if it existed at all.
Now then, it did exist, this was an undeniable fact; and since
the human mind dotes on objects of wonder, you can understand
the worldwide excitement caused by this unearthly apparition.
As for relegating it to the realm of fiction, that charge had
to be dropped.
In essence, on July 20, 1866, the steamer Governor Higginson,
from the Calcutta & Burnach Steam Navigation Co., encountered this
moving mass five miles off the eastern shores of Australia.
9
Captain Baker at first thought he was in the presence of an unknown reef;
he was even about to fix its exact position when two waterspouts
shot out of this inexplicable object and sprang hissing into the air
some 150 feet. So, unless this reef was subject to the intermittent
eruptions of a geyser, the Governor Higginson had fair and honest
dealings with some aquatic mammal, until then unknown, that could
spurt from its blowholes waterspouts mixed with air and steam.
Similar events were likewise observed in Pacific seas, on July 23
of the same year, by the Christopher Columbus from the West India
& Pacific Steam Navigation Co. Consequently, this extraordinary
cetacean could transfer itself from one locality to another with
startling swiftness, since within an interval of just three days,
the Governor Higginson and the Christopher Columbus had observed
it at two positions on the charts separated by a distance of more
than 700 nautical leagues.
Fifteen days later and 2,000 leagues farther, the Helvetia from
the Compagnie Nationale and the Shannon from the Royal Mail line,
running on opposite tacks in that part of the Atlantic lying
between the United States and Europe, respectively signaled each
other that the monster had been sighted in latitude 42 degrees 15'
north and longitude 60 degrees 35' west of the meridian
of Greenwich. From their simultaneous observations, they were able
to estimate the mammal's minimum length at more than 350 English
feet;* this was because both the Shannon and the Helvetia were of
smaller dimensions, although each measured 100 meters stem to stern.
Now then, the biggest whales, those rorqual whales that frequent
the waterways of the Aleutian Islands, have never exceeded a length
of 56 meters--if they reach even that.
*Author's Note: About 106 meters. An English foot is
only 30.4 centimeters.
One after another, reports arrived that would profoundly affect
public opinion: new observations taken by the transatlantic
liner Pereire, the Inman line's Etna running afoul of the monster,
an official report drawn up by officers on the French frigate Normandy,
dead-earnest reckonings obtained by the general staff of
Commodore Fitz-James aboard the Lord Clyde. In lighthearted countries,
people joked about this phenomenon, but such serious, practical countries
as England, America, and Germany were deeply concerned.
In every big city the monster was the latest rage; they sang
about it in the coffee houses, they ridiculed it in the newspapers,
they dramatized it in the theaters. The tabloids found it a fine
opportunity for hatching all sorts of hoaxes. In those newspapers
short of copy, you saw the reappearance of every gigantic
imaginary creature, from "Moby Dick," that dreadful white whale from
the High Arctic regions, to the stupendous kraken whose tentacles
could entwine a 500-ton craft and drag it into the ocean depths.
They even reprinted reports from ancient times: the views
of Aristotle and Pliny accepting the existence of such monsters,
then the Norwegian stories of Bishop Pontoppidan, the narratives
of Paul Egede, and finally the reports of Captain Harrington--
whose good faith is above suspicion--in which he claims he saw,
while aboard the Castilian in 1857, one of those enormous
serpents that, until then, had frequented only the seas of France's
old extremist newspaper, The Constitutionalist.
10
An interminable debate then broke out between believers and
skeptics in the scholarly societies and scientific journals.
The "monster question" inflamed all minds. During this
memorable campaign, journalists making a profession of science
battled with those making a profession of wit, spilling waves of ink
and some of them even two or three drops of blood, since they went
from sea serpents to the most offensive personal remarks.
For six months the war seesawed. With inexhaustible zest,
the popular press took potshots at feature articles from
the Geographic Institute of Brazil, the Royal Academy of Science
in Berlin, the British Association, the Smithsonian Institution
in Washington, D.C., at discussions in The Indian Archipelago,
in Cosmos published by Father Moigno, in Petermann's Mittheilungen,*
and at scientific chronicles in the great French and foreign newspapers.
When the monster's detractors cited a saying by the botanist Linnaeus
that "nature doesn't make leaps," witty writers in the popular
periodicals parodied it, maintaining in essence that "nature doesn't
make lunatics," and ordering their contemporaries never to give
the lie to nature by believing in krakens, sea serpents, "Moby Dicks,"
and other all-out efforts from drunken seamen. Finally, in a much-feared
satirical journal, an article by its most popular columnist finished
off the monster for good, spurning it in the style of Hippolytus
repulsing the amorous advances of his stepmother Phaedra, and giving
the creature its quietus amid a universal burst of laughter.
Wit had defeated science.
*German: "Bulletin." Ed.
During the first months of the year 1867, the question seemed to
be buried, and it didn't seem due for resurrection, when new facts
were brought to the public's attention. But now it was no longer
an issue of a scientific problem to be solved, but a quite real and
serious danger to be avoided. The question took an entirely new turn.
The monster again became an islet, rock, or reef, but a runaway reef,
unfixed and elusive.
On March 5, 1867, the Moravian from the Montreal Ocean Co., lying
during the night in latitude 27 degrees 30' and longitude 72
degrees 15', ran its starboard quarter afoul of a rock marked on no
charts of these waterways. Under the combined efforts of wind and
400-horsepower steam, it was traveling at a speed of thirteen knots.
Without the high quality of its hull, the Moravian would surely have
split open from this collision and gone down together with those 237
passengers it was bringing back from Canada.
This accident happened around five o'clock in the morning, just as day was
beginning to break. The officers on watch rushed to the craft's stern.
They examined the ocean with the most scrupulous care.
They saw nothing except a strong eddy breaking three cable
lengths out, as if those sheets of water had been violently churned.
The site's exact bearings were taken, and the Moravian continued on
course apparently undamaged. Had it run afoul of an underwater rock
or the wreckage of some enormous derelict ship? They were unable to say.
But when they examined its undersides in the service yard,
they discovered that part of its keel had been smashed.
This occurrence, extremely serious in itself, might perhaps have
been forgotten like so many others, if three weeks later it hadn't
been reenacted under identical conditions. Only, thanks to the
11
nationality of the ship victimized by this new ramming, and thanks
to the reputation of the company to which this ship belonged,
the event caused an immense uproar.
No one is unaware of the name of that famous English shipowner,
Cunard. In 1840 this shrewd industrialist founded a postal service
between Liverpool and Halifax, featuring three wooden ships with
400-horsepower paddle wheels and a burden of 1,162 metric tons.
Eight years later, the company's assets were increased by four
650-horsepower ships at 1,820 metric tons, and in two more years,
by two other vessels of still greater power and tonnage.
In 1853 the Cunard Co., whose mail-carrying charter had just been renewed,
successively added to its assets the Arabia, the Persia, the China,
the Scotia, the Java, and the Russia, all ships of top speed and,
after the Great Eastern, the biggest ever to plow the seas.
So in 1867 this company owned twelve ships, eight with paddle wheels
and four with propellers.
If I give these highly condensed details, it is so everyone can fully
understand the importance of this maritime transportation company,
known the world over for its shrewd management. No transoceanic
navigational undertaking has been conducted with more ability,
no business dealings have been crowned with greater success.
In twenty-six years Cunard ships have made 2,000 Atlantic crossings
without so much as a voyage canceled, a delay recorded, a man, a craft,
or even a letter lost. Accordingly, despite strong competition
from France, passengers still choose the Cunard line in preference
to all others, as can be seen in a recent survey of official documents.
Given this, no one will be astonished at the uproar provoked by this
accident involving one of its finest steamers.
On April 13, 1867, with a smooth sea and a moderate breeze,
the Scotia lay in longitude 15 degrees 12' and latitude 45 degrees
37'. It was traveling at a speed of 13.43 knots under the thrust
of its 1,000-horsepower engines. Its paddle wheels were churning
the sea with perfect steadiness. It was then drawing 6.7 meters
of water and displacing 6,624 cubic meters.
At 4:17 in the afternoon, during a high tea for passengers gathered
in the main lounge, a collision occurred, scarcely noticeable
on the whole, affecting the Scotia's hull in that quarter a little
astern of its port paddle wheel.
The Scotia hadn't run afoul of something, it had been fouled,
and by a cutting or perforating instrument rather than a blunt one.
This encounter seemed so minor that nobody on board would have been
disturbed by it, had it not been for the shouts of crewmen in the hold,
who climbed on deck yelling:
"We're sinking! We're sinking!"
At first the passengers were quite frightened, but Captain Anderson
hastened to reassure them. In fact, there could be no immediate danger.
Divided into seven compartments by watertight bulkheads, the Scotia
could brave any leak with impunity.
Captain Anderson immediately made his way into the hold.
He discovered that the fifth compartment had been invaded by the sea,
and the speed of this invasion proved that the leak was considerable.
Fortunately this compartment didn't contain the boilers,
12
because their furnaces would have been abruptly extinguished.
Captain Anderson called an immediate halt, and one of his sailors
dived down to assess the damage. Within moments they had
located a hole two meters in width on the steamer's underside.
Such a leak could not be patched, and with its paddle wheels
half swamped, the Scotia had no choice but to continue its voyage.
By then it lay 300 miles from Cape Clear, and after three days
of delay that filled Liverpool with acute anxiety, it entered
the company docks.
The engineers then proceeded to inspect the Scotia, which had
been put in dry dock. They couldn't believe their eyes.
Two and a half meters below its waterline, there gaped
a symmetrical gash in the shape of an isosceles triangle.
This breach in the sheet iron was so perfectly formed, no punch
could have done a cleaner job of it. Consequently, it must
have been produced by a perforating tool of uncommon toughness--
plus, after being launched with prodigious power and then piercing
four centimeters of sheet iron, this tool had needed to withdraw
itself by a backward motion truly inexplicable.
This was the last straw, and it resulted in arousing public passions
all over again. Indeed, from this moment on, any maritime casualty
without an established cause was charged to the monster's account.
This outrageous animal had to shoulder responsibility for all
derelict vessels, whose numbers are unfortunately considerable,
since out of those 3,000 ships whose losses are recorded annually
at the marine insurance bureau, the figure for steam or sailing
ships supposedly lost with all hands, in the absence of any news,
amounts to at least 200!
Now then, justly or unjustly, it was the "monster" who stood accused
of their disappearance; and since, thanks to it, travel between
the various continents had become more and more dangerous,
the public spoke up and demanded straight out that, at all cost,
the seas be purged of this fearsome cetacean.
13
CHAPTER 2
The Pros and Cons
DURING THE PERIOD in which these developments were occurring,
I had returned from a scientific undertaking organized to explore
the Nebraska badlands in the United States. In my capacity as
Assistant Professor at the Paris Museum of Natural History, I had
been attached to this expedition by the French government.
After spending six months in Nebraska, I arrived in New York laden
with valuable collections near the end of March. My departure
for France was set for early May. In the meantime, then, I was busy
classifying my mineralogical, botanical, and zoological treasures
when that incident took place with the Scotia.
I was perfectly abreast of this question, which was the big news
of the day, and how could I not have been? I had read and reread every
American and European newspaper without being any farther along.
This mystery puzzled me. Finding it impossible to form any views,
I drifted from one extreme to the other. Something was out there,
that much was certain, and any doubting Thomas was invited to place
his finger on the Scotia's wound.
When I arrived in New York, the question was at the boiling point.
The hypothesis of a drifting islet or an elusive reef, put forward
by people not quite in their right minds, was completely eliminated.
And indeed, unless this reef had an engine in its belly, how could
it move about with such prodigious speed?
Also discredited was the idea of a floating hull or some other
enormous wreckage, and again because of this speed of movement.
So only two possible solutions to the question were left,
creating two very distinct groups of supporters: on one side,
those favoring a monster of colossal strength; on the other,
those favoring an "underwater boat" of tremendous motor power.
Now then, although the latter hypothesis was completely admissible,
it couldn't stand up to inquiries conducted in both the New World
and the Old. That a private individual had such a mechanism at his
disposal was less than probable. Where and when had he built it,
and how could he have built it in secret?
Only some government could own such an engine of destruction,
and in these disaster-filled times, when men tax their ingenuity to
build increasingly powerful aggressive weapons, it was possible that,
unknown to the rest of the world, some nation could have been testing
such a fearsome machine. The Chassepot rifle led to the torpedo,
and the torpedo has led to this underwater battering ram,
which in turn will lead to the world putting its foot down.
At least I hope it will.
But this hypothesis of a war machine collapsed in the face of formal
denials from the various governments. Since the public interest
was at stake and transoceanic travel was suffering, the sincerity
14
of these governments could not be doubted. Besides, how could
the assembly of this underwater boat have escaped public notice?
Keeping a secret under such circumstances would be difficult enough
for an individual, and certainly impossible for a nation whose
every move is under constant surveillance by rival powers.
So, after inquiries conducted in England, France, Russia, Prussia,
Spain, Italy, America, and even Turkey, the hypothesis of an underwater
Monitor was ultimately rejected.
And so the monster surfaced again, despite the endless witticisms
heaped on it by the popular press, and the human imagination soon
got caught up in the most ridiculous ichthyological fantasies.
After I arrived in New York, several people did me the honor
of consulting me on the phenomenon in question. In France I had
published a two-volume work, in quarto, entitled The Mysteries
of the Great Ocean Depths. Well received in scholarly circles,
this book had established me as a specialist in this pretty obscure field
of natural history. My views were in demand. As long as I could deny
the reality of the business, I confined myself to a flat "no comment."
But soon, pinned to the wall, I had to explain myself straight out.
And in this vein, "the honorable Pierre Aronnax, Professor at
the Paris Museum," was summoned by The New York Herald to formulate
his views no matter what.
I complied. Since I could no longer hold my tongue, I let it wag.
I discussed the question in its every aspect, both political
and scientific, and this is an excerpt from the well-padded article
I published in the issue of April 30.
"Therefore," I wrote, "after examining these different hypotheses one
by one, we are forced, every other supposition having been refuted,
to accept the existence of an extremely powerful marine animal.
"The deepest parts of the ocean are totally unknown to us.
No soundings have been able to reach them. What goes on in
those distant depths? What creatures inhabit, or could inhabit,
those regions twelve or fifteen miles beneath the surface
of the water? What is the constitution of these animals?
It's almost beyond conjecture.
"However, the solution to this problem submitted to me can take
the form of a choice between two alternatives.
"Either we know every variety of creature populating our planet,
or we do not.
"If we do not know every one of them, if nature still keeps
ichthyological secrets from us, nothing is more admissible than to accept
the existence of fish or cetaceans of new species or even new genera,
animals with a basically 'cast-iron' constitution that inhabit
strata beyond the reach of our soundings, and which some development
or other, an urge or a whim if you prefer, can bring to the upper
level of the ocean for long intervals.
"If, on the other hand, we do know every living species, we must
look for the animal in question among those marine creatures
already cataloged, and in this event I would be inclined to accept
the existence of a giant narwhale.
15
"The common narwhale, or sea unicorn, often reaches a length of
sixty feet. Increase its dimensions fivefold or even tenfold, then give
this cetacean a strength in proportion to its size while enlarging
its offensive weapons, and you have the animal we're looking for.
It would have the proportions determined by the officers of the Shannon,
the instrument needed to perforate the Scotia, and the power
to pierce a steamer's hull.
"In essence, the narwhale is armed with a sort of ivory sword,
or lance, as certain naturalists have expressed it.
It's a king-sized tooth as hard as steel. Some of these teeth have
been found buried in the bodies of baleen whales, which the narwhale
attacks with invariable success. Others have been wrenched,
not without difficulty, from the undersides of vessels that narwhales
have pierced clean through, as a gimlet pierces a wine barrel.
The museum at the Faculty of Medicine in Paris owns one of these
tusks with a length of 2.25 meters and a width at its base
of forty-eight centimeters!
"All right then! Imagine this weapon to be ten times stronger and
the animal ten times more powerful, launch it at a speed of twenty
miles per hour, multiply its mass times its velocity, and you get
just the collision we need to cause the specified catastrophe.
"So, until information becomes more abundant, I plump for a sea
unicorn of colossal dimensions, no longer armed with a mere lance
but with an actual spur, like ironclad frigates or those warships called
'rams,' whose mass and motor power it would possess simultaneously.
"This inexplicable phenomenon is thus explained away--unless it's
something else entirely, which, despite everything that has
been sighted, studied, explored and experienced, is still possible!"
These last words were cowardly of me; but as far as I could,
I wanted to protect my professorial dignity and not lay myself open
to laughter from the Americans, who when they do laugh, laugh raucously.
I had left myself a loophole. Yet deep down, I had accepted
the existence of "the monster."
My article was hotly debated, causing a fine old uproar.
It rallied a number of supporters. Moreover, the solution
it proposed allowed for free play of the imagination.
The human mind enjoys impressive visions of unearthly creatures.
Now then, the sea is precisely their best medium, the only setting
suitable for the breeding and growing of such giants--next to which
such land animals as elephants or rhinoceroses are mere dwarves.
The liquid masses support the largest known species of mammals and perhaps
conceal mollusks of incomparable size or crustaceans too frightful
to contemplate, such as 100-meter lobsters or crabs weighing 200
metric tons! Why not? Formerly, in prehistoric days, land animals
(quadrupeds, apes, reptiles, birds) were built on a gigantic scale.
Our Creator cast them using a colossal mold that time has gradually
made smaller. With its untold depths, couldn't the sea keep alive
such huge specimens of life from another age, this sea that never
changes while the land masses undergo almost continuous alteration?
Couldn't the heart of the ocean hide the last-remaining
varieties of these titanic species, for whom years are centuries
and centuries millennia?
16
But I mustn't let these fantasies run away with me! Enough of these
fairy tales that time has changed for me into harsh realities.
I repeat: opinion had crystallized as to the nature of this phenomenon,
and the public accepted without argument the existence of a prodigious
creature that had nothing in common with the fabled sea serpent.
Yet if some saw it purely as a scientific problem to be solved,
more practical people, especially in America and England,
were determined to purge the ocean of this daunting monster, to insure
the safety of transoceanic travel. The industrial and commercial
newspapers dealt with the question chiefly from this viewpoint.
The Shipping & Mercantile Gazette, the Lloyd's List, France's Packetboat
and Maritime & Colonial Review, all the rags devoted to
insurance companies--who threatened to raise their premium rates--
were unanimous on this point.
Public opinion being pronounced, the States of the Union were
the first in the field. In New York preparations were under way for
an expedition designed to chase this narwhale. A high-speed frigate,
the Abraham Lincoln, was fitted out for putting to sea as soon
as possible. The naval arsenals were unlocked for Commander Farragut,
who pressed energetically forward with the arming of his frigate.
But, as it always happens, just when a decision had been made to chase
the monster, the monster put in no further appearances. For two months
nobody heard a word about it. Not a single ship encountered it.
Apparently the unicorn had gotten wise to these plots being woven
around it. People were constantly babbling about the creature,
even via the Atlantic Cable! Accordingly, the wags claimed that this
slippery rascal had waylaid some passing telegram and was making
the most of it.
So the frigate was equipped for a far-off voyage and armed
with fearsome fishing gear, but nobody knew where to steer it.
And impatience grew until, on June 2, word came that the Tampico,
a steamer on the San Francisco line sailing from California to Shanghai,
had sighted the animal again, three weeks before in the northerly
seas of the Pacific.
This news caused intense excitement. Not even a 24-hour breather was
granted to Commander Farragut. His provisions were loaded on board.
His coal bunkers were overflowing. Not a crewman was missing
from his post. To cast off, he needed only to fire and stoke
his furnaces! Half a day's delay would have been unforgivable!
But Commander Farragut wanted nothing more than to go forth.
I received a letter three hours before the Abraham Lincoln left
its Brooklyn pier;* the letter read as follows:
*Author's Note: A pier is a type of wharf expressly set aside
for an individual vessel.
Pierre Aronnax
Professor at the Paris Museum
Fifth Avenue Hotel
New York
17
Sir:
If you would like to join the expedition on the Abraham Lincoln,
the government of the Union will be pleased to regard you as France's
representative in this undertaking. Commander Farragut has a cabin
at your disposal.
Very cordially yours,
J. B. HOBSON,
Secretary of the Navy.
18
CHAPTER 3
As Master Wishes
THREE SECONDS before the arrival of J. B. Hobson's letter,
I no more dreamed of chasing the unicorn than of trying for
the Northwest Passage. Three seconds after reading this letter
from the honorable Secretary of the Navy, I understood at last that
my true vocation, my sole purpose in life, was to hunt down this
disturbing monster and rid the world of it.
Even so, I had just returned from an arduous journey, exhausted and badly
needing a rest. I wanted nothing more than to see my country again,
my friends, my modest quarters by the Botanical Gardens,
my dearly beloved collections! But now nothing could hold me back.
I forgot everything else, and without another thought of exhaustion,
friends, or collections, I accepted the American government's offer.
"Besides," I mused, "all roads lead home to Europe, and our unicorn
may be gracious enough to take me toward the coast of France! That fine
animal may even let itself be captured in European seas--as a personal
favor to me--and I'll bring back to the Museum of Natural History
at least half a meter of its ivory lance!"
But in the meantime I would have to look for this narwhale in
the northern Pacific Ocean; which meant returning to France by way
of the Antipodes.
"Conseil!" I called in an impatient voice.
Conseil was my manservant. A devoted lad who went with me on all
my journeys; a gallant Flemish boy whom I genuinely liked and who
returned the compliment; a born stoic, punctilious on principle,
habitually hardworking, rarely startled by life's surprises,
very skillful with his hands, efficient in his every duty, and despite
his having a name that means "counsel," never giving advice--
not even the unsolicited kind!
From rubbing shoulders with scientists in our little universe
by the Botanical Gardens, the boy had come to know a thing or two.
In Conseil I had a seasoned specialist in biological classification,
an enthusiast who could run with acrobatic agility up and down
the whole ladder of branches, groups, classes, subclasses,
orders, families, genera, subgenera, species, and varieties.
But there his science came to a halt. Classifying was everything
to him, so he knew nothing else. Well versed in the theory
of classification, he was poorly versed in its practical application,
and I doubt that he could tell a sperm whale from a baleen whale!
And yet, what a fine, gallant lad!
For the past ten years, Conseil had gone with me wherever
science beckoned. Not once did he comment on the length or the hardships
of a journey. Never did he object to buckling up his suitcase for any
country whatever, China or the Congo, no matter how far off it was.
He went here, there, and everywhere in perfect contentment.
Moreover, he enjoyed excellent health that defied all ailments,
19
owned solid muscles, but hadn't a nerve in him, not a sign of nerves--
the mental type, I mean.
The lad was thirty years old, and his age to that of his employer
was as fifteen is to twenty. Please forgive me for this underhanded
way of admitting I had turned forty.
But Conseil had one flaw. He was a fanatic on formality,
and he only addressed me in the third person--to the point where
it got tiresome.
"Conseil!" I repeated, while feverishly beginning my preparations
for departure.
To be sure, I had confidence in this devoted lad. Ordinarily, I never
asked whether or not it suited him to go with me on my journeys;
but this time an expedition was at issue that could drag on indefinitely,
a hazardous undertaking whose purpose was to hunt an animal that could
sink a frigate as easily as a walnut shell! There was good reason
to stop and think, even for the world's most emotionless man.
What would Conseil say?
"Conseil!" I called a third time.
Conseil appeared.
"Did master summon me?" he said, entering.
"Yes, my boy. Get my things ready, get yours ready.
We're departing in two hours."
"As master wishes," Conseil replied serenely.
"We haven't a moment to lose. Pack as much into my trunk as you can,
my traveling kit, my suits, shirts, and socks, don't bother counting,
just squeeze it all in--and hurry!"
"What about master's collections?" Conseil ventured to observe.
"We'll deal with them later."
"What! The archaeotherium, hyracotherium, oreodonts, cheiropotamus,
and master's other fossil skeletons?"
"The hotel will keep them for us."
"What about master's live babirusa?"
"They'll feed it during our absence. Anyhow, we'll leave instructions
to ship the whole menagerie to France."
"Then we aren't returning to Paris?" Conseil asked.
"Yes, we are . . . certainly . . . ," I replied evasively,
"but after we make a detour."
"Whatever detour master wishes."
"Oh, it's nothing really! A route slightly less direct, that's all.
We're leaving on the Abraham Lincoln."
20
"As master thinks best," Conseil replied placidly.
"You see, my friend, it's an issue of the monster,
the notorious narwhale. We're going to rid the seas of it!
The author of a two-volume work, in quarto, on The Mysteries
of the Great Ocean Depths has no excuse for not setting sail
with Commander Farragut. It's a glorious mission but also a
dangerous one! We don't know where it will take us! These beasts
can be quite unpredictable! But we're going just the same!
We have a commander who's game for anything!"
"What master does, I'll do," Conseil replied.
"But think it over, because I don't want to hide anything from you.
This is one of those voyages from which people don't always come back!"
"As master wishes."
A quarter of an hour later, our trunks were ready. Conseil did
them in a flash, and I was sure the lad hadn't missed a thing,
because he classified shirts and suits as expertly as birds and mammals.
The hotel elevator dropped us off in the main vestibule on the mezzanine.
I went down a short stair leading to the ground floor.
I settled my bill at that huge counter that was always under siege
by a considerable crowd. I left instructions for shipping my containers
of stuffed animals and dried plants to Paris, France. I opened a line
of credit sufficient to cover the babirusa and, Conseil at my heels,
I jumped into a carriage.
For a fare of twenty francs, the vehicle went down Broadway
to Union Square, took Fourth Ave. to its junction with Bowery St.,
turned into Katrin St. and halted at Pier 34. There the Katrin ferry
transferred men, horses, and carriage to Brooklyn, that great New York
annex located on the left bank of the East River, and in a few
minutes we arrived at the wharf next to which the Abraham Lincoln
was vomiting torrents of black smoke from its two funnels.
Our baggage was immediately carried to the deck of the frigate.
I rushed aboard. I asked for Commander Farragut. One of the sailors led
me to the afterdeck, where I stood in the presence of a smart-looking
officer who extended his hand to me.
"Professor Pierre Aronnax?" he said to me.
"The same," I replied. "Commander Farragut?"
"In person. Welcome aboard, professor. Your cabin is waiting for you."
I bowed, and letting the commander attend to getting under way,
I was taken to the cabin that had been set aside for me.
The Abraham Lincoln had been perfectly chosen and fitted out
for its new assignment. It was a high-speed frigate furnished
with superheating equipment that allowed the tension of its steam
to build to seven atmospheres. Under this pressure the Abraham Lincoln
reached an average speed of 18.3 miles per hour, a considerable
speed but still not enough to cope with our gigantic cetacean.
21
The frigate's interior accommodations complemented its nautical virtues.
I was well satisfied with my cabin, which was located in the stern
and opened into the officers' mess.
"We'll be quite comfortable here," I told Conseil.
"With all due respect to master," Conseil replied, "as comfortable
as a hermit crab inside the shell of a whelk."
I left Conseil to the proper stowing of our luggage and climbed
on deck to watch the preparations for getting under way.
Just then Commander Farragut was giving orders to cast off the last
moorings holding the Abraham Lincoln to its Brooklyn pier.
And so if I'd been delayed by a quarter of an hour or even less,
the frigate would have gone without me, and I would have missed
out on this unearthly, extraordinary, and inconceivable expedition,
whose true story might well meet with some skepticism.
But Commander Farragut didn't want to waste a single day,
or even a single hour, in making for those seas where the animal
had just been sighted. He summoned his engineer.
"Are we up to pressure?" he asked the man.
"Aye, sir," the engineer replied.
"Go ahead, then!" Commander Farragut called.
At this order, which was relayed to the engine by means of a
compressed-air device, the mechanics activated the start-up wheel.
Steam rushed whistling into the gaping valves. Long horizontal
pistons groaned and pushed the tie rods of the drive shaft.
The blades of the propeller churned the waves with increasing speed,
and the Abraham Lincoln moved out majestically amid a spectator-laden
escort of some 100 ferries and tenders.*
*Author's Note: Tenders are small steamboats that assist
the big liners.
The wharves of Brooklyn, and every part of New York bordering
the East River, were crowded with curiosity seekers.
Departing from 500,000 throats, three cheers burst forth in succession.
Thousands of handkerchiefs were waving above these tightly packed masses,
hailing the Abraham
Lincoln until it reached the waters of the Hudson River, at the tip
of the long peninsula that forms New York City.
The frigate then went along the New Jersey coast--the wonderful
right bank of this river, all loaded down with country homes--
and passed by the forts to salutes from their biggest cannons.
The Abraham Lincoln replied by three times lowering and hoisting
the American flag, whose thirty-nine stars gleamed from the gaff of
the mizzen sail; then, changing speed to take the buoy-marked channel
that curved into the inner bay formed by the spit of Sandy Hook,
it hugged this sand-covered strip of land where thousands of spectators
acclaimed us one more time.
The escort of boats and tenders still followed the frigate and only
22
left us when we came abreast of the lightship, whose two signal
lights mark the entrance of the narrows to Upper New York Bay.
Three o'clock then sounded. The harbor pilot went down into his
dinghy and rejoined a little schooner waiting for him to leeward.
The furnaces were stoked; the propeller churned the waves more swiftly;
the frigate skirted the flat, yellow coast of Long Island;
and at eight o'clock in the evening, after the lights of Fire Island
had vanished into the northwest, we ran at full steam onto the dark
waters of the Atlantic.
23
CHAPTER 4
Ned Land
COMMANDER FARRAGUT was a good seaman, worthy of the frigate
he commanded. His ship and he were one. He was its very soul.
On the cetacean question no doubts arose in his mind, and he didn't
allow the animal's existence to be disputed aboard his vessel.
He believed in it as certain pious women believe in the leviathan
from the Book of Job--out of faith, not reason. The monster existed,
and he had vowed to rid the seas of it. The man was a sort of
Knight of Rhodes, a latter-day Sir Dieudonné of Gozo, on his way
to fight an encounter with the dragon devastating the island.
Either Commander Farragut would slay the narwhale, or the narwhale
would slay Commander Farragut. No middle of the road for these two.
The ship's officers shared the views of their leader. They could
be heard chatting, discussing, arguing, calculating the different
chances of an encounter, and observing the vast expanse of the ocean.
Voluntary watches from the crosstrees of the topgallant sail
were self-imposed by more than one who would have cursed such toil
under any other circumstances. As often as the sun swept over
its daily arc, the masts were populated with sailors whose feet
itched and couldn't hold still on the planking of the deck below!
And the Abraham Lincoln's stempost hadn't even cut the suspected
waters of the Pacific.
As for the crew, they only wanted to encounter the unicorn,
harpoon it, haul it on board, and carve it up. They surveyed the sea
with scrupulous care. Besides, Commander Farragut had mentioned
that a certain sum of $2,000.00 was waiting for the man who first
sighted the animal, be he cabin boy or sailor, mate or officer.
I'll let the reader decide whether eyes got proper exercise aboard
the Abraham Lincoln.
As for me, I didn't lag behind the others and I yielded to no
one my share in these daily observations. Our frigate would
have had fivescore good reasons for renaming itself the Argus,
after that mythological beast with 100 eyes! The lone rebel among
us was Conseil, who seemed utterly uninterested in the question
exciting us and was out of step with the general enthusiasm on board.
As I said, Commander Farragut had carefully equipped his ship
with all the gear needed to fish for a gigantic cetacean.
No whaling vessel could have been better armed. We had every
known mechanism, from the hand-hurled harpoon, to the blunderbuss
firing barbed arrows, to the duck gun with exploding bullets.
On the forecastle was mounted the latest model breech-loading cannon,
very heavy of barrel and narrow of bore, a weapon that would figure
in the Universal Exhibition of 1867. Made in America, this valuable
instrument could fire a four-kilogram conical projectile an average
distance of sixteen kilometers without the least bother.
So the Abraham Lincoln wasn't lacking in means of destruction.
But it had better still. It had Ned Land, the King of Harpooners.
24
Gifted with uncommon manual ability, Ned Land was a Canadian who had
no equal in his dangerous trade. Dexterity, coolness, bravery,
and cunning were virtues he possessed to a high degree, and it took
a truly crafty baleen whale or an exceptionally astute sperm whale
to elude the thrusts of his harpoon.
Ned Land was about forty years old. A man of great height--over six
English feet--he was powerfully built, serious in manner, not very
sociable, sometimes headstrong, and quite ill-tempered when crossed.
His looks caught the attention, and above all the strength of his gaze,
which gave a unique emphasis to his facial appearance.
Commander Farragut, to my thinking, had made a wise move in hiring
on this man. With his eye and his throwing arm, he was worth
the whole crew all by himself. I can do no better than to compare
him with a powerful telescope that could double as a cannon always
ready to fire.
To say Canadian is to say French, and as unsociable as
Ned Land was, I must admit he took a definite liking to me.
No doubt it was my nationality that attracted him.
It was an opportunity for him to speak, and for me to hear,
that old Rabelaisian dialect still used in some Canadian provinces.
The harpooner's family originated in Quebec, and they were already
a line of bold fishermen back in the days when this town still
belonged to France.
Little by little Ned developed a taste for chatting, and I loved
hearing the tales of his adventures in the polar seas. He described
his fishing trips and his battles with great natural lyricism.
His tales took on the form of an epic poem, and I felt I was hearing
some Canadian Homer reciting his Iliad of the High Arctic regions.
I'm writing of this bold companion as I currently know him.
Because we've become old friends, united in that permanent
comradeship born and cemented during only the most frightful crises!
Ah, my gallant Ned! I ask only to live 100 years more, the longer
to remember you!
And now, what were Ned Land's views on this question of a marine monster?
I must admit that he flatly didn't believe in the unicorn,
and alone on board, he didn't share the general conviction.
He avoided even dealing with the subject, for which one day I felt
compelled to take him to task.
During the magnificent evening of June 25--in other words, three weeks
after our departure--the frigate lay abreast of Cabo Blanco,
thirty miles to leeward of the coast of Patagonia. We had crossed
the Tropic of Capricorn, and the Strait of Magellan opened
less than 700 miles to the south. Before eight days were out,
the Abraham Lincoln would plow the waves of the Pacific.
Seated on the afterdeck, Ned Land and I chatted about one thing
and another, staring at that mysterious sea whose depths to this
day are beyond the reach of human eyes. Quite naturally,
I led our conversation around to the giant unicorn, and I weighed
our expedition's various chances for success or failure.
Then, seeing that Ned just let me talk without saying much himself,
I pressed him more closely.
25
"Ned," I asked him, "how can you still doubt the reality of this
cetacean we're after? Do you have any particular reasons for
being so skeptical?"
The harpooner stared at me awhile before replying, slapped his
broad forehead in one of his standard gestures, closed his eyes
as if to collect himself, and finally said:
"Just maybe, Professor Aronnax."
"But Ned, you're a professional whaler, a man familiar with all
the great marine mammals--your mind should easily accept this
hypothesis of an enormous cetacean, and you ought to be the last
one to doubt it under these circumstances!"
"That's just where you're mistaken, professor," Ned replied.
"The common man may still believe in fabulous comets crossing
outer space, or in prehistoric monsters living at the earth's core,
but astronomers and geologists don't swallow such fairy tales.
It's the same with whalers. I've chased plenty of cetaceans,
I've harpooned a good number, I've killed several. But no matter
how powerful and well armed they were, neither their tails or their
tusks could puncture the sheet-iron plates of a steamer."
"Even so, Ned, people mention vessels that narwhale tusks have
run clean through."
"Wooden ships maybe," the Canadian replied. "But I've never seen
the like. So till I have proof to the contrary, I'll deny that
baleen whales, sperm whales, or unicorns can do any such thing."
"Listen to me, Ned--"
"No, no, professor. I'll go along with anything you want except that.
Some gigantic devilfish maybe . . . ?"
"Even less likely, Ned. The devilfish is merely a mollusk, and even this
name hints at its semiliquid flesh, because it's Latin meaning soft one.
The devilfish doesn't belong to the vertebrate branch, and even if it
were 500 feet long, it would still be utterly harmless to ships
like the Scotia or the Abraham Lincoln. Consequently, the feats
of krakens or other monsters of that ilk must be relegated to
the realm of fiction."
"So, Mr. Naturalist," Ned Land continued in a bantering tone,
"you'll just keep on believing in the existence of some
enormous cetacean . . . ?"
"Yes, Ned, I repeat it with a conviction backed by factual logic.
I believe in the existence of a mammal with a powerful constitution,
belonging to the vertebrate branch like baleen whales, sperm whales,
or dolphins, and armed with a tusk made of horn that has
tremendous penetrating power."
"Humph!" the harpooner put in, shaking his head with the attitude
of a man who doesn't want to be convinced.
"Note well, my fine Canadian," I went on, "if such an animal exists,
if it lives deep in the ocean, if it frequents the liquid strata
located miles beneath the surface of the water, it needs to have
26
a constitution so solid, it defies all comparison."
"And why this powerful constitution?" Ned asked.
"Because it takes incalculable strength just to live in those deep
strata and withstand their pressure."
"Oh really?" Ned said, tipping me a wink.
"Oh really, and I can prove it to you with a few simple figures."
"Bosh!" Ned replied. "You can make figures do anything you want!"
"In business, Ned, but not in mathematics. Listen to me.
Let's accept that the pressure of one atmosphere is represented
by the pressure of a column of water thirty-two feet high.
In reality, such a column of water wouldn't be quite so high because
here we're dealing with salt water, which is denser than fresh water.
Well then, when you dive under the waves, Ned, for every thirty-two
feet of water above you, your body is tolerating the pressure
of one more atmosphere, in other words, one more kilogram per
each square centimeter on your body's surface. So it follows
that at 320 feet down, this pressure is equal to ten atmospheres,
to 100 atmospheres at 3,200 feet, and to 1,000 atmospheres at
32,000 feet, that is, at about two and a half vertical leagues down.
Which is tantamount to saying that if you could reach such a depth
in the ocean, each square centimeter on your body's surface would
be experiencing 1,000 kilograms of pressure. Now, my gallant Ned,
do you know how many square centimeters you have on your bodily surface?"
"I haven't the foggiest notion, Professor Aronnax."
"About 17,000."
"As many as that?"
"Yes, and since the atmosphere's pressure actually weighs slightly
more than one kilogram per square centimeter, your 17,000 square
centimeters are tolerating 17,568 kilograms at this very moment."
"Without my noticing it?"
"Without your noticing it. And if you aren't crushed by so much pressure,
it's because the air penetrates the interior of your body with
equal pressure. When the inside and outside pressures are in
perfect balance, they neutralize each other and allow you to tolerate
them without discomfort. But in the water it's another story."
"Yes, I see," Ned replied, growing more interested.
"Because the water surrounds me but doesn't penetrate me."
"Precisely, Ned. So at thirty-two feet beneath the surface of the sea,
you'll undergo a pressure of 17,568 kilograms; at 320 feet, or ten times
greater pressure, it's 175,680 kilograms; at 3,200 feet, or 100 times
greater pressure, it's 1,756,800 kilograms; finally, at 32,000 feet,
or 1,000 times greater pressure, it's 17,568,000 kilograms;
in other words, you'd be squashed as flat as if you'd just been
yanked from between the plates of a hydraulic press!"
"Fire and brimstone!" Ned put in.
27
"All right then, my fine harpooner, if vertebrates several hundred
meters long and proportionate in bulk live at such depths,
their surface areas make up millions of square centimeters,
and the pressure they undergo must be assessed in billions of kilograms.
Calculate, then, how much resistance of bone structure and strength
of constitution they'd need in order to withstand such pressures!"
"They'd need to be manufactured," Ned Land replied, "from sheet-iron
plates eight inches thick, like ironclad frigates."
"Right, Ned, and then picture the damage such a mass could inflict
if it were launched with the speed of an express train against
a ship's hull."
"Yes . . . indeed . . . maybe," the Canadian replied, staggered by
these figures but still not willing to give in.
"Well, have I convinced you?"
"You've convinced me of one thing, Mr. Naturalist. That deep
in the sea, such animals would need to be just as strong as you say--
if they exist."
"But if they don't exist, my stubborn harpooner, how do you explain
the accident that happened to the Scotia?"
"It's maybe . . . ," Ned said, hesitating.
"Go on!"
"Because . . . it just couldn't be true!" the Canadian replied,
unconsciously echoing a famous catchphrase of the scientist Arago.
But this reply proved nothing, other than how bullheaded the harpooner
could be. That day I pressed him no further. The Scotia's accident
was undeniable. Its hole was real enough that it had to be plugged up,
and I don't think a hole's existence can be more emphatically proven.
Now then, this hole didn't make itself, and since it hadn't resulted
from underwater rocks or underwater machines, it must have been
caused by the perforating tool of some animal.
Now, for all the reasons put forward to this point, I believed that
this animal was a member of the branch Vertebrata, class Mammalia,
group Pisciforma, and finally, order Cetacea. As for the family
in which it would be placed (baleen whale, sperm whale, or dolphin),
the genus to which it belonged, and the species in which it would
find its proper home, these questions had to be left for later.
To answer them called for dissecting this unknown monster; to dissect
it called for catching it; to catch it called for harpooning it--
which was Ned Land's business; to harpoon it called for sighting it--
which was the crew's business; and to sight it called for encountering it--
which was a chancy business.
28
CHAPTER 5
At Random!
FOR SOME WHILE the voyage of the Abraham Lincoln was marked by
no incident. But one circumstance arose that displayed Ned Land's
marvelous skills and showed just how much confidence we could
place in him.
Off the Falkland Islands on June 30, the frigate came in contact
with a fleet of American whalers, and we learned that they hadn't
seen the narwhale. But one of them, the captain of the Monroe,
knew that Ned Land had shipped aboard the Abraham Lincoln
and asked his help in hunting a baleen whale that was in sight.
Anxious to see Ned Land at work, Commander Farragut authorized him
to make his way aboard the Monroe. And the Canadian had such good luck
that with a right-and-left shot, he harpooned not one whale but two,
striking the first straight to the heart and catching the other
after a few minutes' chase!
Assuredly, if the monster ever had to deal with Ned Land's harpoon,
I wouldn't bet on the monster.
The frigate sailed along the east coast of South America with
prodigious speed. By July 3 we were at the entrance to the Strait
of Magellan, abreast of Cabo de las Virgenes. But Commander Farragut
was unwilling to attempt this tortuous passageway and maneuvered
instead to double Cape Horn.
The crew sided with him unanimously. Indeed, were we
likely to encounter the narwhale in such a cramped strait?
Many of our sailors swore that the monster couldn't negotiate this
passageway simply because "he's too big for it!"
Near three o'clock in the afternoon on July 6, fifteen miles south
of shore, the Abraham Lincoln doubled that solitary islet at the tip
of the South American continent, that stray rock Dutch seamen had
named Cape Horn after their hometown of Hoorn. Our course was set
for the northwest, and the next day our frigate's propeller finally
churned the waters of the Pacific.
"Open your eyes! Open your eyes!" repeated the sailors of
the Abraham Lincoln.
And they opened amazingly wide. Eyes and spyglasses (a bit dazzled,
it is true, by the vista of $2,000.00) didn't remain at rest for
an instant. Day and night we observed the surface of the ocean,
and those with nyctalopic eyes, whose ability to see in the dark
increased their chances by fifty percent, had an excellent shot
at winning the prize.
As for me, I was hardly drawn by the lure of money and yet was far from
the least attentive on board. Snatching only a few minutes for meals
and a few hours for sleep, come rain or come shine, I no longer left
the ship's deck. Sometimes bending over the forecastle railings,
sometimes leaning against the sternrail, I eagerly scoured that
29
cotton-colored wake that whitened the ocean as far as the eye could see!
And how many times I shared the excitement of general staff and crew
when some unpredictable whale lifted its blackish back above the waves.
In an instant the frigate's deck would become densely populated.
The cowls over the companionways would vomit a torrent of sailors
and officers. With panting chests and anxious eyes, we each would
observe the cetacean's movements. I stared; I stared until I nearly
went blind from a worn-out retina, while Conseil, as stoic as ever,
kept repeating to me in a calm tone:
"If master's eyes would kindly stop bulging, master will see farther!"
But what a waste of energy! The Abraham Lincoln would change
course and race after the animal sighted, only to find an ordinary
baleen whale or a common sperm whale that soon disappeared amid
a chorus of curses!
However, the weather held good. Our voyage was proceeding under
the most favorable conditions. By then it was the bad season
in these southernmost regions, because July in this zone corresponds
to our January in Europe; but the sea remained smooth and easily
visible over a vast perimeter.
Ned Land still kept up the most tenacious skepticism; beyond his
spells on watch, he pretended that he never even looked at
the surface of the waves, at least while no whales were in sight.
And yet the marvelous power of his vision could have performed
yeoman service. But this stubborn Canadian spent eight
hours out of every twelve reading or sleeping in his cabin.
A hundred times I chided him for his unconcern.
"Bah!" he replied. "Nothing's out there, Professor Aronnax,
and if there is some animal, what chance would we have of spotting it?
Can't you see we're just wandering around at random? People say
they've sighted this slippery beast again in the Pacific high seas--
I'm truly willing to believe it, but two months have already gone
by since then, and judging by your narwhale's personality, it hates
growing moldy from hanging out too long in the same waterways!
It's blessed with a terrific gift for getting around.
Now, professor, you know even better than I that nature doesn't
violate good sense, and she wouldn't give some naturally slow animal
the ability to move swiftly if it hadn't a need to use that talent.
So if the beast does exist, it's already long gone!"
I had no reply to this. Obviously we were just groping blindly.
But how else could we go about it? All the same, our chances were
automatically pretty limited. Yet everyone still felt confident
of success, and not a sailor on board would have bet against
the narwhale appearing, and soon.
On July 20 we cut the Tropic of Capricorn at longitude 105
degrees, and by the 27th of the same month, we had cleared
the equator on the 110th meridian. These bearings determined,
the frigate took a more decisive westward heading and tackled
the seas of the central Pacific. Commander Farragut felt,
and with good reason, that it was best to stay in deep waters and
keep his distance from continents or islands, whose neighborhoods
the animal always seemed to avoid--"No doubt," our bosun said,
"because there isn't enough water for him!" So the frigate kept
well out when passing the Tuamotu, Marquesas, and Hawaiian Islands,
30
then cut the Tropic of Cancer at longitude 132 degrees and headed
for the seas of China.
We were finally in the area of the monster's latest antics!
And in all honesty, shipboard conditions became life-threatening.
Hearts were pounding hideously, gearing up for futures full
of incurable aneurysms. The entire crew suffered from a nervous
excitement that it's beyond me to describe. Nobody ate, nobody slept.
Twenty times a day some error in perception, or the optical
illusions of some sailor perched in the crosstrees, would cause
intolerable anguish, and this emotion, repeated twenty times over,
kept us in a state of irritability so intense that a reaction was
bound to follow.
And this reaction wasn't long in coming. For three months,
during which each day seemed like a century, the Abraham Lincoln plowed
all the northerly seas of the Pacific, racing after whales sighted,
abruptly veering off course, swerving sharply from one tack to another,
stopping suddenly, putting on steam and reversing engines in quick
succession, at the risk of stripping its gears, and it didn't leave
a single point unexplored from the beaches of Japan to the coasts
of America. And we found nothing! Nothing except an immenseness
of deserted waves! Nothing remotely resembling a gigantic narwhale,
or an underwater islet, or a derelict shipwreck, or a runaway reef,
or anything the least bit unearthly!
So the reaction set in. At first, discouragement took hold of
people's minds, opening the door to disbelief. A new feeling appeared
on board, made up of three-tenths shame and seven-tenths fury.
The crew called themselves "out-and-out fools" for being
hoodwinked by a fairy tale, then grew steadily more furious!
The mountains of arguments amassed over a year collapsed all at once,
and each man now wanted only to catch up on his eating and sleeping,
to make up for the time he had so stupidly sacrificed.
With typical human fickleness, they jumped from one extreme
to the other. Inevitably, the most enthusiastic supporters
of the undertaking became its most energetic opponents.
This reaction mounted upward from the bowels of the ship, from the
quarters of the bunker hands to the messroom of the general staff;
and for certain, if it hadn't been for Commander Farragut's
characteristic stubbornness, the frigate would ultimately have put
back to that cape in the south.
But this futile search couldn't drag on much longer.
The Abraham Lincoln had done everything it could to succeed and
had no reason to blame itself. Never had the crew of an American
naval craft shown more patience and zeal; they weren't responsible
for this failure; there was nothing to do but go home.
A request to this effect was presented to the commander.
The commander stood his ground. His sailors couldn't hide
their discontent, and their work suffered because of it.
I'm unwilling to say that there was mutiny on board, but after
a reasonable period of intransigence, Commander Farragut,
like Christopher Columbus before him, asked for a grace period
of just three days more. After this three-day delay, if the monster
hadn't appeared, our helmsman would give three turns of the wheel,
and the Abraham Lincoln would chart a course toward European seas.
31
This promise was given on November 2. It had the immediate effect
of reviving the crew's failing spirits. The ocean was observed
with renewed care. Each man wanted one last look with which to sum
up his experience. Spyglasses functioned with feverish energy.
A supreme challenge had been issued to the giant narwhale, and the latter
had no acceptable excuse for ignoring this Summons to Appear!
Two days passed. The Abraham Lincoln stayed at half steam.
On the offchance that the animal might be found in these waterways,
a thousand methods were used to spark its interest or rouse it
from its apathy. Enormous sides of bacon were trailed in our wake,
to the great satisfaction, I must say, of assorted sharks.
While the Abraham Lincoln heaved to, its longboats radiated
in every direction around it and didn't leave a single point
of the sea unexplored. But the evening of November 4 arrived
with this underwater mystery still unsolved.
At noon the next day, November 5, the agreed-upon delay expired.
After a position fix, true to his promise, Commander Farragut would
have to set his course for the southeast and leave the northerly
regions of the Pacific decisively behind.
By then the frigate lay in latitude 31 degrees 15' north and longitude
136 degrees 42' east. The shores of Japan were less than 200 miles
to our leeward. Night was coming on. Eight o'clock had just struck.
Huge clouds covered the moon's disk, then in its first quarter.
The sea undulated placidly beneath the frigate's stempost.
Just then I was in the bow, leaning over the starboard rail.
Conseil, stationed beside me, stared straight ahead.
Roosting in the shrouds, the crew examined the horizon, which shrank
and darkened little by little. Officers were probing the increasing
gloom with their night glasses. Sometimes the murky ocean sparkled
beneath moonbeams that darted between the fringes of two clouds.
Then all traces of light vanished into the darkness.
Observing Conseil, I discovered that, just barely, the gallant lad
had fallen under the general influence. At least so I thought.
Perhaps his nerves were twitching with curiosity for the first
time in history.
"Come on, Conseil!" I told him. "Here's your last chance to
pocket that $2,000.00!"
"If master will permit my saying so," Conseil replied, "I never
expected to win that prize, and the Union government could have
promised $100,000.00 and been none the poorer."
"You're right, Conseil, it turned out to be a foolish business
after all, and we jumped into it too hastily. What a waste of time,
what a futile expense of emotion! Six months ago we could have been
back in France--"
"In master's little apartment," Conseil answered. "In master's museum!
And by now I would have classified master's fossils.
And master's babirusa would be ensconced in its cage at the zoo
in the Botanical Gardens, and it would have attracted every curiosity
seeker in town!"
"Quite so, Conseil, and what's more, I imagine that people will soon
32
be poking fun at us!"
"To be sure," Conseil replied serenely, "I do think they'll have fun
at master's expense. And must it be said . . . ?"
"It must be said, Conseil."
"Well then, it will serve master right!"
"How true!"
"When one has the honor of being an expert as master is, one mustn't
lay himself open to--"
Conseil didn't have time to complete the compliment.
In the midst of the general silence, a voice became audible.
It was Ned Land's voice, and it shouted:
"Ahoy! There's the thing in question, abreast of us to leeward!"
33
CHAPTER 6
At Full Steam
AT THIS SHOUT the entire crew rushed toward the harpooner--
commander, officers, mates,
sailors, cabin boys, down to engineers leaving their machinery
and stokers neglecting their furnaces. The order was given to stop,
and the frigate merely coasted.
By then the darkness was profound, and as good as the Canadian's
eyes were, I still wondered how he could see--and what he had seen.
My heart was pounding fit to burst.
But Ned Land was not mistaken, and we all spotted the object his
hand was indicating.
Two cable lengths off the Abraham Lincoln's starboard quarter,
the sea seemed to be lit up from underneath. This was no
mere phosphorescent phenomenon, that much was unmistakable.
Submerged some fathoms below the surface of the water, the monster
gave off that very intense but inexplicable glow that several
captains had mentioned in their reports. This magnificent radiance
had to come from some force with a great illuminating capacity.
The edge of its light swept over the sea in an immense,
highly elongated oval, condensing at the center into a blazing core
whose unbearable glow diminished by degrees outward.
"It's only a cluster of phosphorescent particles!" exclaimed one
of the officers.
"No, sir," I answered with conviction. "Not even angel-wing
clams or salps have ever given off such a powerful light.
That glow is basically electric in nature. Besides . . . look, look!
It's shifting! It's moving back and forth! It's darting at us!"
A universal shout went up from the frigate.
"Quiet!" Commander Farragut said. "Helm hard to leeward!
Reverse engines!"
Sailors rushed to the helm, engineers to their machinery.
Under reverse steam immediately, the Abraham Lincoln beat to port,
sweeping in a semicircle.
"Right your helm! Engines forward!" Commander Farragut called.
These orders were executed, and the frigate swiftly retreated
from this core of light.
My mistake. It wanted to retreat, but the unearthly animal came
at us with a speed double our own.
We gasped. More stunned than afraid, we stood mute and motionless.
The animal caught up with us, played with us. It made a full
34
circle around the frigate--then doing fourteen knots--and wrapped
us in sheets of electricity that were like luminous dust.
Then it retreated two or three miles, leaving a phosphorescent
trail comparable to those swirls of steam that shoot behind
the locomotive of an express train. Suddenly, all the way from
the dark horizon where it had gone to gather momentum, the monster
abruptly dashed toward the Abraham Lincoln with frightening speed,
stopped sharply twenty feet from our side plates, and died out--
not by diving under the water, since its glow did not recede gradually--
but all at once, as if the source of this brilliant emanation had
suddenly dried up. Then it reappeared on the other side of the ship,
either by circling around us or by gliding under our hull.
At any instant a collision could have occurred that would have been
fatal to us.
Meanwhile I was astonished at the frigate's maneuvers. It was fleeing,
not fighting. Built to pursue, it was being pursued, and I commented
on this to Commander Farragut. His face, ordinarily so emotionless,
was stamped with indescribable astonishment.
"Professor Aronnax," he answered me, "I don't know what kind of
fearsome creature I'm up against, and I don't want my frigate running
foolish risks in all this darkness. Besides, how should we attack
this unknown creature, how should we defend ourselves against it?
Let's wait for daylight, and then we'll play a different role."
"You've no further doubts, commander, as to the nature of this animal?"
"No, sir, it's apparently a gigantic narwhale, and an electric
one to boot."
"Maybe," I added, "it's no more approachable than an electric eel
or an electric ray!"
"Right," the commander replied. "And if it has their power
to electrocute, it's surely the most dreadful animal ever conceived
by our Creator. That's why I'll keep on my guard, sir."
The whole crew stayed on their feet all night long. No one even
thought of sleeping. Unable to compete with the monster's speed,
the Abraham Lincoln slowed down and stayed at half steam.
For its part, the narwhale mimicked the frigate, simply rode with
the waves, and seemed determined not to forsake the field of battle.
However, near midnight it disappeared, or to use a more appropriate
expression, "it went out," like a huge glowworm. Had it fled from us?
We were duty bound to fear so rather than hope so. But at 12:53
in the morning, a deafening hiss became audible, resembling the sound
made by a waterspout expelled with tremendous intensity.
By then Commander Farragut, Ned Land, and I were on the afterdeck,
peering eagerly into the profound gloom.
"Ned Land," the commander asked, "you've often heard whales bellowing?"
"Often, sir, but never a whale like this, whose sighting
earned me $2,000.00."
"Correct, the prize is rightfully yours. But tell me, isn't that
the noise cetaceans make when they spurt water from their blowholes?"
35
"The very noise, sir, but this one's way louder. So there can
be no mistake. There's definitely a whale lurking in our waters.
With your permission, sir," the harpooner added, "tomorrow at daybreak
we'll have words with it."
"If it's in a mood to listen to you, Mr. Land," I replied in a tone
far from convinced.
"Let me get within four harpoon lengths of it," the Canadian shot back,
"and it had better listen!"
"But to get near it," the commander went on, "I'd have to put
a whaleboat at your disposal?"
"Certainly, sir."
"That would be gambling with the lives of my men."
"And with my own!" the harpooner replied simply.
Near two o'clock in the morning, the core of light reappeared,
no less intense, five miles to windward of the Abraham Lincoln.
Despite the distance, despite the noise of wind and sea, we could
distinctly hear the fearsome thrashings of the animal's tail,
and even its panting breath. Seemingly, the moment this enormous
narwhale came up to breathe at the surface of the ocean,
air was sucked into its lungs like steam into the huge cylinders
of a 2,000-horsepower engine.
"Hmm!" I said to myself. "A cetacean as powerful as a whole
cavalry regiment--now that's a whale of a whale!"
We stayed on the alert until daylight, getting ready for action.
Whaling gear was set up along the railings. Our chief officer loaded
the blunderbusses, which can launch harpoons as far as a mile,
and long duck guns with exploding bullets that can mortally wound
even the most powerful animals. Ned Land was content to sharpen
his harpoon, a dreadful weapon in his hands.
At six o'clock day began to break, and with the dawn's early light,
the narwhale's electric glow disappeared. At seven o'clock the day
was well along, but a very dense morning mist shrank the horizon,
and our best spyglasses were unable to pierce it. The outcome:
disappointment and anger.
I hoisted myself up to the crosstrees of the mizzen sail.
Some officers were already perched on the mastheads.
At eight o'clock the mist rolled ponderously over the waves,
and its huge curls were lifting little by little. The horizon grew
wider and clearer all at once.
Suddenly, just as on the previous evening, Ned Land's voice was audible.
"There's the thing in question, astern to port!" the harpooner shouted.
Every eye looked toward the point indicated.
There, a mile and a half from the frigate, a long blackish body
36
emerged a meter above the waves. Quivering violently, its tail was
creating a considerable eddy. Never had caudal equipment thrashed
the sea with such power. An immense wake of glowing whiteness
marked the animal's track, sweeping in a long curve.
Our frigate drew nearer to the cetacean. I examined it with a completely
open mind. Those reports from the Shannon and the Helvetia had slightly
exaggerated its dimensions, and I put its length at only 250 feet.
Its girth was more difficult to judge, but all in all, the animal
seemed to be wonderfully proportioned in all three dimensions.
While I was observing this phenomenal creature, two jets of steam
and water sprang from its blowholes and rose to an altitude
of forty meters, which settled for me its mode of breathing.
From this I finally concluded that it belonged to the branch Vertebrata,
class Mammalia, subclass Monodelphia, group Pisciforma,
order Cetacea, family . . . but here I couldn't make up my mind.
The order Cetacea consists of three families, baleen whales,
sperm whales, dolphins, and it's in this last group that narwhales
are placed. Each of these families is divided into several genera,
each genus into species, each species into varieties.
So I was still missing variety, species, genus, and family,
but no doubt I would complete my classifying with the aid of Heaven
and Commander Farragut.
The crew were waiting impatiently for orders from their leader.
The latter, after carefully observing the animal, called for
his engineer. The engineer raced over.
"Sir," the commander said, "are you up to pressure?"
"Aye, sir," the engineer replied.
"Fine. Stoke your furnaces and clap on full steam!"
Three cheers greeted this order. The hour of battle had sounded.
A few moments later, the frigate's two funnels vomited torrents
of black smoke, and its deck quaked from the trembling of its boilers.
Driven forward by its powerful propeller, the Abraham Lincoln headed
straight for the animal. Unconcerned, the latter let us come
within half a cable length; then, not bothering to dive, it got up
a little speed, retreated, and was content to keep its distance.
This chase dragged on for about three-quarters of an hour without
the frigate gaining two fathoms on the cetacean. At this rate,
it was obvious that we would never catch up with it.
Infuriated, Commander Farragut kept twisting the thick tuft of hair
that flourished below his chin.
"Ned Land!" he called.
The Canadian reported at once.
"Well, Mr. Land," the commander asked, "do you still advise putting
my longboats to sea?"
"No, sir," Ned Land replied, "because that beast won't be caught
against its will."
37
"Then what should we do?"
"Stoke up more steam, sir, if you can. As for me, with your
permission I'll go perch on the bobstays under the bowsprit,
and if we can get within a harpoon length, I'll harpoon the brute."
"Go to it, Ned," Commander Farragut replied. "Engineer," he called,
"keep the pressure mounting!"
Ned Land made his way to his post. The furnaces were urged
into greater activity; our propeller did forty-three revolutions
per minute, and steam shot from the valves. Heaving the log,
we verified that the Abraham Lincoln was going at the rate of 18.5
miles per hour.
But that damned animal also did a speed of 18.5.
For the next hour our frigate kept up this pace without gaining a fathom!
This was humiliating for one of the fastest racers in the American navy.
The crew were working up into a blind rage. Sailor after sailor heaved
insults at the monster, which couldn't be bothered with answering back.
Commander Farragut was no longer content simply to twist his goatee;
he chewed on it.
The engineer was summoned once again.
"You're up to maximum pressure?" the commander asked him.
"Aye, sir," the engineer replied.
"And your valves are charged to . . . ?"
"To six and a half atmospheres."
"Charge them to ten atmospheres."
A typical American order if I ever heard one. It would have
sounded just fine during some Mississippi paddle-wheeler race,
to "outstrip the competition!"
"Conseil," I said to my gallant servant, now at my side, "you realize
that we'll probably blow ourselves skyhigh?"
"As master wishes!" Conseil replied.
All right, I admit it: I did wish to run this risk!
The valves were charged. More coal was swallowed by the furnaces.
Ventilators shot torrents of air over the braziers.
The Abraham Lincoln's speed increased. Its masts trembled down
to their blocks, and swirls of smoke could barely squeeze through
the narrow funnels.
We heaved the log a second time.
"Well, helmsman?" Commander Farragut asked.
"19.3 miles per hour, sir."
38
"Keep stoking the furnaces."
The engineer did so. The pressure gauge marked ten atmospheres.
But no doubt the cetacean itself had "warmed up," because without
the least trouble, it also did 19.3.
What a chase! No, I can't describe the excitement that shook
my very being. Ned Land stayed at his post, harpoon in hand.
Several times the animal let us approach.
"We're overhauling it!" the Canadian would shout.
Then, just as he was about to strike, the cetacean would steal off
with a swiftness I could estimate at no less than thirty miles per hour.
And even at our maximum speed, it took the liberty of thumbing
its nose at the frigate by running a full circle around us!
A howl of fury burst from every throat!
By noon we were no farther along than at eight o'clock in the morning.
Commander Farragut then decided to use more direct methods.
"Bah!" he said. "So that animal is faster than the Abraham Lincoln.
All right, we'll see if it can outrun our conical shells!
Mate, man the gun in the bow!"
Our forecastle cannon was immediately loaded and leveled.
The cannoneer fired a shot, but his shell passed some feet above
the cetacean, which stayed half a mile off.
"Over to somebody with better aim!" the commander shouted.
"And $500.00 to the man who can pierce that infernal beast!"
Calm of eye, cool of feature, an old gray-bearded gunner--
I can see him to this day--approached the cannon, put it in position,
and took aim for a good while. There was a mighty explosion,
mingled with cheers from the crew.
The shell reached its target; it hit the animal, but not in the
usual fashion--it bounced off that rounded surface and vanished
into the sea two miles out.
"Oh drat!" said the old gunner in his anger. "That rascal must
be covered with six-inch armor plate!"
"Curse the beast!" Commander Farragut shouted.
The hunt was on again, and Commander Farragut leaned over to me, saying:
"I'll chase that animal till my frigate explodes!"
"Yes," I replied, "and nobody would blame you!"
We could still hope that the animal would tire out and not be as
insensitive to exhaustion as our steam engines. But no such luck.
Hour after hour went by without it showing the least sign of weariness.
39
However, to the Abraham Lincoln's credit, it must be said that we
struggled on with tireless persistence. I estimate that we covered
a distance of at least 500 kilometers during this ill-fated day
of November 6. But night fell and wrapped the surging ocean
in its shadows.
By then I thought our expedition had come to an end, that we would
never see this fantastic animal again. I was mistaken.
At 10:50 in the evening, that electric light reappeared three
miles to windward of the frigate, just as clear and intense
as the night before.
The narwhale seemed motionless. Was it asleep perhaps, weary from
its workday, just riding with the waves? This was our chance,
and Commander Farragut was determined to take full advantage of it.
He gave his orders. The Abraham Lincoln stayed at half steam,
advancing cautiously so as not to awaken its adversary.
In midocean it's not unusual to encounter whales so sound asleep
they can successfully be attacked, and Ned Land had harpooned
more than one in its slumber. The Canadian went to resume his post
on the bobstays under the bowsprit.
The frigate approached without making a sound, stopped two cable
lengths from the animal and coasted. Not a soul breathed on board.
A profound silence reigned over the deck. We were not 100 feet
from the blazing core of light, whose glow grew stronger and
dazzled the eyes.
Just then, leaning over the forecastle railing, I saw Ned Land
below me, one hand grasping the martingale, the other brandishing
his dreadful harpoon. Barely twenty feet separated him from
the motionless animal.
All at once his arm shot forward and the harpoon was launched.
I heard the weapon collide resonantly, as if it had hit
some hard substance.
The electric light suddenly went out, and two enormous waterspouts
crashed onto the deck of the frigate, racing like a torrent from
stem to stern, toppling crewmen, breaking spare masts and yardarms
from their lashings.
A hideous collision occurred, and thrown over the rail with no time
to catch hold of it, I was hurled into the sea.
40
CHAPTER 7
A Whale of Unknown Species
ALTHOUGH I WAS startled by this unexpected descent, I at least
have a very clear recollection of my sensations during it.
At first I was dragged about twenty feet under. I'm a good swimmer,
without claiming to equal such other authors as Byron and Edgar Allan Poe,
who were master divers, and I didn't lose my head on the way down.
With two vigorous kicks of the heel, I came back to the surface
of the sea.
My first concern was to look for the frigate. Had the crew
seen me go overboard? Was the Abraham Lincoln tacking about?
Would Commander Farragut put a longboat to sea? Could I hope
to be rescued?
The gloom was profound. I glimpsed a black mass disappearing eastward,
where its running lights were fading out in the distance.
It was the frigate. I felt I was done for.
"Help! Help!" I shouted, swimming desperately toward the Abraham Lincoln.
My clothes were weighing me down. The water glued them to
my body, they were paralyzing my movements. I was sinking!
I was suffocating . . . !
"Help!"
This was the last shout I gave. My mouth was filling with water.
I struggled against being dragged into the depths. . . .
Suddenly my clothes were seized by energetic hands, I felt myself
pulled abruptly back to the surface of the sea, and yes, I heard
these words pronounced in my ear:
"If master would oblige me by leaning on my shoulder, master will
swim with much greater ease."
With one hand I seized the arm of my loyal Conseil.
"You!" I said. "You!"
"Myself," Conseil replied, "and at master's command."
"That collision threw you overboard along with me?"
"Not at all. But being in master's employ, I followed master."
The fine lad thought this only natural!
"What about the frigate?" I asked.
"The frigate?" Conseil replied, rolling over on his back.
"I think master had best not depend on it to any great extent!"
41
"What are you saying?"
"I'm saying that just as I jumped overboard, I heard the men at
the helm shout, 'Our propeller and rudder are smashed!' "
"Smashed?"
"Yes, smashed by the monster's tusk! I believe it's the sole injury
the Abraham Lincoln has sustained. But most inconveniently for us,
the ship can no longer steer."
"Then we're done for!"
"Perhaps," Conseil replied serenely. "However, we still have a few
hours before us, and in a few hours one can do a great many things!"
Conseil's unflappable composure cheered me up. I swam more vigorously,
but hampered by clothes that were as restricting as a cloak made
of lead, I was managing with only the greatest difficulty.
Conseil noticed as much.
"Master will allow me to make an incision," he said.
And he slipped an open clasp knife under my clothes, slitting them
from top to bottom with one swift stroke. Then he briskly undressed
me while I swam for us both.
I then did Conseil the same favor, and we continued to "navigate"
side by side.
But our circumstances were no less dreadful. Perhaps they
hadn't seen us go overboard; and even if they had, the frigate--
being undone by its rudder--couldn't return to leeward after us.
So we could count only on its longboats.
Conseil had coolly reasoned out this hypothesis and laid his
plans accordingly. An amazing character, this boy; in midocean,
this stoic lad seemed right at home!
So, having concluded that our sole chance for salvation
lay in being picked up by the Abraham Lincoln's longboats,
we had to take steps to wait for them as long as possible.
Consequently, I decided to divide our energies so we wouldn't
both be worn out at the same time, and this was the arrangement:
while one of us lay on his back, staying motionless with arms crossed and
legs outstretched, the other would swim and propel his partner forward.
This towing role was to last no longer than ten minutes, and by
relieving each other in this way, we could stay afloat for hours,
perhaps even until daybreak.
Slim chance, but hope springs eternal in the human breast!
Besides, there were two of us. Lastly, I can vouch--as improbable
as it seems--that even if I had wanted to destroy all my illusions,
even if I had been willing to "give in to despair," I could not
have done so!
The cetacean had rammed our frigate at about eleven o'clock
in the evening. I therefore calculated on eight hours of swimming
until sunrise. A strenuous task, but feasible, thanks to our
42
relieving each other. The sea was pretty smooth and barely tired us.
Sometimes I tried to peer through the dense gloom, which was broken
only by the phosphorescent flickers coming from our movements.
I stared at the luminous ripples breaking over my hands,
shimmering sheets spattered with blotches of bluish gray.
It seemed as if we'd plunged into a pool of quicksilver.
Near one o'clock in the morning, I was overcome with
tremendous exhaustion. My limbs stiffened in the grip of intense cramps.
Conseil had to keep me going, and attending to our self-preservation
became his sole responsibility. I soon heard the poor lad gasping;
his breathing became shallow and quick. I didn't think he could
stand such exertions for much longer.
"Go on! Go on!" I told him.
"Leave master behind?" he replied. "Never! I'll drown before he does!"
Just then, past the fringes of a large cloud that the wind was
driving eastward, the moon appeared. The surface of the sea
glistened under its rays. That kindly light rekindled our strength.
I held up my head again. My eyes darted to every point of the horizon.
I spotted the frigate. It was five miles from us and formed no
more than a dark, barely perceptible mass. But as for longboats,
not a one in sight!
I tried to call out. What was the use at such a distance!
My swollen lips wouldn't let a single sound through. Conseil could
still articulate a few words, and I heard him repeat at intervals:
"Help! Help!"
Ceasing all movement for an instant, we listened. And it may have
been a ringing in my ear, from this organ filling with impeded blood,
but it seemed to me that Conseil's shout had received an answer back.
"Did you hear that?" I muttered.
"Yes, yes!"
And Conseil hurled another desperate plea into space.
This time there could be no mistake! A human voice had answered us!
Was it the voice of some poor devil left behind in midocean,
some other victim of that collision suffered by our ship?
Or was it one of the frigate's longboats, hailing us out of the gloom?
Conseil made one final effort, and bracing his hands on my shoulders,
while I offered resistance with one supreme exertion, he raised
himself half out of the water, then fell back exhausted.
"What did you see?"
"I saw . . . ," he muttered, "I saw . . . but we mustn't talk . . .
save our strength . . . !"
What had he seen? Then, lord knows why, the thought of the monster came
into my head for the first time . . . ! But even so, that voice . . . ?
Gone are the days when Jonahs took refuge in the bellies of whales!
43
Nevertheless, Conseil kept towing me. Sometimes he looked up,
stared straight ahead, and shouted a request for directions,
which was answered by a voice that was getting closer and closer.
I could barely hear it. I was at the end of my strength; my fingers
gave out; my hands were no help to me; my mouth opened convulsively,
filling with brine; its coldness ran through me; I raised my head
one last time, then I collapsed. . . .
Just then something hard banged against me. I clung to it.
Then I felt myself being pulled upward, back to the surface of the water;
my chest caved in, and I fainted. . . .
For certain, I came to quickly, because someone was massaging me
so vigorously it left furrows in my flesh. I half opened my eyes. . . .
"Conseil!" I muttered.
"Did master ring for me?" Conseil replied.
Just then, in the last light of a moon settling on the horizon,
I spotted a face that wasn't Conseil's but which I recognized at once.
"Ned!" I exclaimed.
"In person, sir, and still after his prize!" the Canadian replied.
"You were thrown overboard after the frigate's collision?"
"Yes, professor, but I was luckier than you, and right away I was
able to set foot on this floating islet."
"Islet?"
"Or in other words, on our gigantic narwhale."
"Explain yourself, Ned."
"It's just that I soon realized why my harpoon got blunted and couldn't
puncture its hide."
"Why, Ned, why?"
"Because, professor, this beast is made of boilerplate steel!"
At this point in my story, I need to get a grip on myself,
reconstruct exactly what I experienced, and make doubly sure
of everything I write.
The Canadian's last words caused a sudden upheaval in my brain.
I swiftly hoisted myself to the summit of this half-submerged creature
or object that was serving as our refuge. I tested it with my foot.
Obviously it was some hard, impenetrable substance, not the soft
matter that makes up the bodies of our big marine mammals.
But this hard substance could have been a bony carapace, like those
that covered some prehistoric animals, and I might have left it
at that and classified this monster among such amphibious reptiles
as turtles or alligators.
Well, no. The blackish back supporting me was smooth and polished
44
with no overlapping scales. On impact, it gave off a metallic sonority,
and as incredible as this sounds, it seemed, I swear, to be made
of riveted plates.
No doubts were possible! This animal, this monster, this natural
phenomenon that had puzzled the whole scientific world, that had
muddled and misled the minds of seamen in both hemispheres, was,
there could be no escaping it, an even more astonishing phenomenon--
a phenomenon made by the hand of man.
Even if I had discovered that some fabulous, mythological creature
really existed, it wouldn't have given me such a terrific mental jolt.
It's easy enough to accept that prodigious things can come from
our Creator. But to find, all at once, right before your eyes,
that the impossible had been mysteriously achieved by man himself:
this staggers the mind!
But there was no question now. We were stretched out on the back
of some kind of underwater boat that, as far as I could judge,
boasted the shape of an immense steel fish. Ned Land had clear
views on the issue. Conseil and I could only line up behind him.
"But then," I said, "does this contraption contain some sort
of locomotive mechanism, and a crew to run it?"
"Apparently," the harpooner replied. "And yet for the three hours
I've lived on this floating island, it hasn't shown a sign of life."
"This boat hasn't moved at all?"
"No, Professor Aronnax. It just rides with the waves, but otherwise
it hasn't stirred."
"But we know that it's certainly gifted with great speed.
Now then, since an engine is needed to generate that speed,
and a mechanic to run that engine, I conclude: we're saved."
"Humph!" Ned Land put in, his tone denoting reservations.
Just then, as if to take my side in the argument, a bubbling began
astern of this strange submersible--whose drive mechanism was obviously
a propeller--and the boat started to move. We barely had time to hang
on to its topside, which emerged about eighty centimeters above water.
Fortunately its speed was not excessive.
"So long as it navigates horizontally," Ned Land muttered,
"I've no complaints. But if it gets the urge to dive, I wouldn't
give $2.00 for my hide!"
The Canadian might have quoted a much lower price.
So it was imperative to make contact with whatever beings were
confined inside the plating of this machine. I searched its surface
for an opening or a hatch, a "manhole," to use the official term;
but the lines of rivets had been firmly driven into the sheet-iron
joins and were straight and uniform.
Moreover, the moon then disappeared and left us in profound darkness.
We had to wait for daylight to find some way of getting inside
this underwater boat.
45
So our salvation lay totally in the hands of the mysterious helmsmen
steering this submersible, and if it made a dive, we were done for!
But aside from this occurring, I didn't doubt the possibility
of our making contact with them. In fact, if they didn't produce
their own air, they inevitably had to make periodic visits
to the surface of the ocean to replenish their oxygen supply.
Hence the need for some opening that put the boat's interior
in contact with the atmosphere.
As for any hope of being rescued by Commander Farragut, that had to be
renounced completely. We were being swept westward, and I estimate
that our comparatively moderate speed reached twelve miles per hour.
The propeller churned the waves with mathematical regularity,
sometimes emerging above the surface and throwing phosphorescent
spray to great heights.
Near four o'clock in the morning, the submersible picked up speed.
We could barely cope with this dizzying rush, and the waves battered
us at close range. Fortunately Ned's hands came across a big
mooring ring fastened to the topside of this sheet-iron back,
and we all held on for dear life.
Finally this long night was over. My imperfect memories won't let me
recall my every impression of it. A single detail comes back to me.
Several times, during various lulls of wind and sea, I thought I
heard indistinct sounds, a sort of elusive harmony produced by
distant musical chords. What was the secret behind this underwater
navigating, whose explanation the whole world had sought in vain?
What beings lived inside this strange boat? What mechanical force
allowed it to move about with such prodigious speed?
Daylight appeared. The morning mists surrounded us, but they
soon broke up. I was about to proceed with a careful examination
of the hull, whose topside formed a sort of horizontal platform,
when I felt it sinking little by little.
"Oh, damnation!" Ned Land shouted, stamping his foot on the resonant
sheet iron. "Open up there, you antisocial navigators!"
But it was difficult to make yourself heard above the deafening beats
of the propeller. Fortunately this submerging movement stopped.
From inside the boat, there suddenly came noises of iron fastenings
pushed roughly aside. One of the steel plates flew up, a man appeared,
gave a bizarre yell, and instantly disappeared.
A few moments later, eight strapping fellows appeared silently,
their faces like masks, and dragged us down into their fearsome machine.
46
CHAPTER 8
"Mobilis in Mobili"
THIS BRUTALLY EXECUTED capture was carried out with lightning speed.
My companions and I had no time to collect ourselves. I don't
know how they felt about being shoved inside this aquatic prison,
but as for me, I was shivering all over. With whom were we dealing?
Surely with some new breed of pirates, exploiting the sea after
their own fashion.
The narrow hatch had barely closed over me when I was surrounded by
profound darkness. Saturated with the outside light, my eyes couldn't
make out a thing. I felt my naked feet clinging to the steps of an
iron ladder. Forcibly seized, Ned Land and Conseil were behind me.
At the foot of the ladder, a door opened and instantly closed behind
us with a loud clang.
We were alone. Where? I couldn't say, could barely even imagine.
All was darkness, but such utter darkness that after several minutes,
my eyes were still unable to catch a single one of those hazy gleams
that drift through even the blackest nights.
Meanwhile, furious at these goings on, Ned Land gave free rein
to his indignation.
"Damnation!" he exclaimed. "These people are about as hospitable
as the savages of New Caledonia! All that's lacking is for them
to be cannibals! I wouldn't be surprised if they were, but believe
you me, they won't eat me without my kicking up a protest!"
"Calm yourself, Ned my friend," Conseil replied serenely.
"Don't flare up so quickly! We aren't in a kettle yet!"
"In a kettle, no," the Canadian shot back, "but in an oven for sure.
It's dark enough for one. Luckily my Bowie knife hasn't left me,
and I can still see well enough to put it to use.* The first one
of these bandits who lays a hand on me--"
*Author's Note: A Bowie knife is a wide-bladed dagger that Americans
are forever carrying around.
"Don't be so irritable, Ned," I then told the harpooner,
"and don't ruin things for us with pointless violence.
Who knows whether they might be listening to us? Instead, let's try
to find out where we are!"
I started moving, groping my way. After five steps I encountered
an iron wall made of riveted boilerplate. Then, turning around,
I bumped into a wooden table next to which several stools had been set.
The floor of this prison lay hidden beneath thick, hempen matting
that deadened the sound of footsteps. Its naked walls didn't reveal
any trace of a door or window. Going around the opposite way,
Conseil met up with me, and we returned to the middle of this cabin,
which had to be twenty feet long by ten wide. As for its height,
not even Ned Land, with his great stature, was able to determine it.
47
Half an hour had already gone by without our situation changing,
when our eyes were suddenly spirited from utter darkness into
blinding light. Our prison lit up all at once; in other words,
it filled with luminescent matter so intense that at first I
couldn't stand the brightness of it. From its glare and whiteness,
I recognized the electric glow that had played around this
underwater boat like some magnificent phosphorescent phenomenon.
After involuntarily closing my eyes, I reopened them and saw
that this luminous force came from a frosted half globe curving
out of the cabin's ceiling.
"Finally! It's light enough to see!" Ned Land exclaimed, knife in hand,
staying on the defensive.
"Yes," I replied, then ventured the opposite view. "But as for
our situation, we're still in the dark."
"Master must learn patience," said the emotionless Conseil.
This sudden illumination of our cabin enabled me to examine its
tiniest details. It contained only a table and five stools.
Its invisible door must have been hermetically sealed.
Not a sound reached our ears. Everything seemed dead inside this boat.
Was it in motion, or stationary on the surface of the ocean,
or sinking into the depths? I couldn't tell.
But this luminous globe hadn't been turned on without good reason.
Consequently, I hoped that some crewmen would soon make an appearance.
If you want to consign people to oblivion, you don't light
up their dungeons.
I was not mistaken. Unlocking noises became audible, a door opened,
and two men appeared.
One was short and stocky, powerfully muscled, broad shouldered,
robust of limbs, the head squat, the hair black and luxuriant,
the mustache heavy, the eyes bright and penetrating, and his
whole personality stamped with that southern-blooded zest that,
in France, typifies the people of Provence. The philosopher
Diderot has very aptly claimed that a man's bearing is the clue
to his character, and this stocky little man was certainly
a living proof of this claim. You could sense that his everyday
conversation must have been packed with such vivid figures of
speech as personification, symbolism, and misplaced modifiers.
But I was never in a position to verify this because, around me,
he used only an odd and utterly incomprehensible dialect.
The second stranger deserves a more detailed description.
A disciple of such character-judging anatomists as Gratiolet
or Engel could have read this man's features like an open book.
Without hesitation, I identified his dominant qualities--
self-confidence, since his head reared like a nobleman's above the arc
formed by the lines of his shoulders, and his black eyes gazed
with icy assurance; calmness, since his skin, pale rather than ruddy,
indicated tranquility of blood; energy, shown by the swiftly knitting
muscles of his brow; and finally courage, since his deep breathing
48
denoted tremendous reserves of vitality.
I might add that this was a man of great pride, that his calm,
firm gaze seemed to reflect thinking on an elevated plane,
and that the harmony of his facial expressions and bodily
movements resulted in an overall effect of unquestionable candor--
according to the findings of physiognomists, those analysts
of facial character.
I felt "involuntarily reassured" in his presence, and this boded
well for our interview.
Whether this individual was thirty-five or fifty years of age,
I could not precisely state. He was tall, his forehead broad,
his nose straight, his mouth clearly etched, his teeth magnificent,
his hands refined, tapered, and to use a word from palmistry,
highly "psychic," in other words, worthy of serving a lofty
and passionate spirit. This man was certainly the most wonderful
physical specimen I had ever encountered. One unusual detail:
his eyes were spaced a little far from each other and could
instantly take in nearly a quarter of the horizon. This ability--
as I later verified--was strengthened by a range of vision even greater
than Ned Land's. When this stranger focused his gaze on an object,
his eyebrow lines gathered into a frown, his heavy eyelids closed
around his pupils to contract his huge field of vision, and he looked!
What a look--as if he could magnify objects shrinking into the distance;
as if he could probe your very soul; as if he could pierce those sheets
of water so opaque to our eyes and scan the deepest seas . . . !
Wearing caps made of sea-otter fur, and shod in sealskin fishing boots,
these two strangers were dressed in clothing made from some unique
fabric that flattered the figure and allowed great freedom of movement.
The taller of the two--apparently the leader on board--examined us
with the greatest care but without pronouncing a word. Then, turning to
his companion, he conversed with him in a language I didn't recognize.
It was a sonorous, harmonious, flexible dialect whose vowels seemed
to undergo a highly varied accentuation.
The other replied with a shake of the head and added two or three
utterly incomprehensible words. Then he seemed to question me
directly with a long stare.
I replied in clear French that I wasn't familiar with his language;
but he didn't seem to understand me, and the situation
grew rather baffling.
"Still, master should tell our story," Conseil said to me.
"Perhaps these gentlemen will grasp a few words of it!"
I tried again, telling the tale of our adventures, clearly articulating
my every syllable, and not leaving out a single detail. I stated
our names and titles; then, in order, I introduced Professor Aronnax,
his manservant Conseil, and Mr. Ned Land, harpooner.
The man with calm, gentle eyes listened to me serenely,
even courteously, and paid remarkable attention. But nothing
in his facial expression indicated that he understood my story.
When I finished, he didn't pronounce a single word.
49
One resource still left was to speak English. Perhaps they would
be familiar with this nearly universal language. But I only knew it,
as I did the German language, well enough to read it fluently,
not well enough to speak it correctly. Here, however, our overriding
need was to make ourselves understood.
"Come on, it's your turn," I told the harpooner. "Over to you,
Mr. Land. Pull out of your bag of tricks the best English ever spoken
by an Anglo-Saxon, and try for a more favorable result than mine."
Ned needed no persuading and started our story all over again,
most of which I could follow. Its content was the same,
but the form differed. Carried away by his volatile temperament,
the Canadian put great animation into it. He complained
vehemently about being imprisoned in defiance of his civil rights,
asked by virtue of which law he was hereby detained, invoked writs
of habeas corpus, threatened to press charges against anyone holding
him in illegal custody, ranted, gesticulated, shouted, and finally
conveyed by an expressive gesture that we were dying of hunger.
This was perfectly true, but we had nearly forgotten the fact.
Much to his amazement, the harpooner seemed no more intelligible
than I had been. Our visitors didn't bat an eye. Apparently they
were engineers who understood the languages of neither the French
physicist Arago nor the English physicist Faraday.
Thoroughly baffled after vainly exhausting our philological resources,
I no longer knew what tactic to pursue, when Conseil told me:
"If master will authorize me, I'll tell the whole business in German."
"What! You know German?" I exclaimed.
"Like most Flemish people, with all due respect to master."
"On the contrary, my respect is due you. Go to it, my boy."
And Conseil, in his serene voice, described for the third time
the various vicissitudes of our story. But despite our narrator's
fine accent and stylish turns of phrase, the German language met
with no success.
Finally, as a last resort, I hauled out everything I could
remember from my early schooldays, and I tried to narrate our
adventures in Latin. Cicero would have plugged his ears and sent
me to the scullery, but somehow I managed to pull through.
With the same negative result.
This last attempt ultimately misfiring, the two strangers exchanged
a few words in their incomprehensible language and withdrew,
not even favoring us with one of those encouraging gestures that are
used in every country in the world. The door closed again.
"This is outrageous!" Ned Land shouted, exploding for the
twentieth time. "I ask you! We speak French, English, German,
and Latin to these rogues, and neither of them has the decency
to even answer back!"
50
"Calm down, Ned," I told the seething harpooner. "Anger won't
get us anywhere."
"But professor," our irascible companion went on, "can't you see
that we could die of hunger in this iron cage?"
"Bah!" Conseil put in philosophically. "We can hold out a
good while yet!"
"My friends," I said, "we mustn't despair. We've gotten out of
tighter spots. So please do me the favor of waiting a bit before
you form your views on the commander and crew of this boat."
"My views are fully formed," Ned Land shot back. "They're rogues!"
"Oh good! And from what country?"
"Roguedom!"
"My gallant Ned, as yet that country isn't clearly marked on maps of
the world, but I admit that the nationality of these two strangers is hard
to make out! Neither English, French, nor German, that's all we can say.
But I'm tempted to think that the commander and his chief officer
were born in the low latitudes. There must be southern blood in them.
But as to whether they're Spaniards, Turks, Arabs, or East Indians,
their physical characteristics don't give me enough to go on.
And as for their speech, it's utterly incomprehensible."
"That's the nuisance in not knowing every language," Conseil replied,
"or the drawback in not having one universal language!"
"Which would all go out the window!" Ned Land replied.
"Don't you see, these people have a language all to themselves,
a language they've invented just to cause despair in decent people
who ask for a little dinner! Why, in every country on earth,
when you open your mouth, snap your jaws, smack your lips and teeth,
isn't that the world's most understandable message? From Quebec
to the Tuamotu Islands, from Paris to the Antipodes, doesn't it mean:
I'm hungry, give me a bite to eat!"
"Oh," Conseil put in, "there are some people so unintelligent
by nature . . ."
As he was saying these words, the door opened. A steward
entered.* He brought us some clothes, jackets and sailor's pants,
made out of a fabric whose nature I didn't recognize.
I hurried to change into them, and my companions followed suit.
*Author's Note: A steward is a waiter on board a steamer.
Meanwhile our silent steward, perhaps a deaf-mute, set the table
and laid three place settings.
"There's something serious afoot," Conseil said, "and it bodes well."
"Bah!" replied the rancorous harpooner. "What the devil do you suppose
they eat around here? Turtle livers, loin of shark, dogfish steaks?"
"We'll soon find out!" Conseil said.
51
Overlaid with silver dish covers, various platters had been
neatly positioned on the table cloth, and we sat down to eat.
Assuredly, we were dealing with civilized people, and if it hadn't
been for this electric light flooding over us, I would have thought
we were in the dining room of the Hotel Adelphi in Liverpool,
or the Grand Hotel in Paris. However, I feel compelled to mention
that bread and wine were totally absent. The water was fresh and clear,
but it was still water--which wasn't what Ned Land had in mind.
Among the foods we were served, I was able to identify various
daintily dressed fish; but I couldn't make up my mind about certain
otherwise excellent dishes, and I couldn't even tell whether
their contents belonged to the vegetable or the animal kingdom.
As for the tableware, it was elegant and in perfect taste.
Each utensil, spoon, fork, knife, and plate, bore on its reverse
a letter encircled by a Latin motto, and here is its exact duplicate:
MOBILIS IN MOBILI
N
Moving within the moving element! It was a highly appropriate
motto for this underwater machine, so long as the preposition
in is translated as within and not upon. The letter N was no doubt
the initial of the name of that mystifying individual in command
beneath the seas!
Ned and Conseil had no time for such musings. They were wolfing
down their food, and without further ado I did the same.
By now I felt reassured about our fate, and it seemed obvious
that our hosts didn't intend to let us die of starvation.
But all earthly things come to an end, all things must pass,
even the hunger of people who haven't eaten for fifteen hours.
Our appetites appeased, we felt an urgent need for sleep.
A natural reaction after that interminable night of fighting
for our lives.
"Ye gods, I'll sleep soundly," Conseil said.
"Me, I'm out like a light!" Ned Land replied.
My two companions lay down on the cabin's carpeting and were soon
deep in slumber.
As for me, I gave in less readily to this intense need for sleep.
Too many thoughts had piled up in my mind, too many insoluble
questions had arisen, too many images were keeping my eyelids open!
Where were we? What strange power was carrying us along?
I felt--or at least I thought I did--the submersible sinking
toward the sea's lower strata. Intense nightmares besieged me.
In these mysterious marine sanctuaries, I envisioned hosts
of unknown animals, and this underwater boat seemed to be a blood
relation of theirs: living, breathing, just as fearsome . . . !
Then my mind grew calmer, my imagination melted into hazy drowsiness,
and I soon fell into an uneasy slumber.
52
CHAPTER 9
The Tantrums of Ned Land
I HAVE NO IDEA how long this slumber lasted; but it must have been
a good while, since we were
completely over our exhaustion. I was the first one to wake up.
My companions weren't yet stirring and still lay in their corners
like inanimate objects.
I had barely gotten up from my passably hard mattress when I felt
my mind clear, my brain go on the alert. So I began a careful
reexamination of our cell.
Nothing had changed in its interior arrangements.
The prison was still a prison and its prisoners still prisoners.
But, taking advantage of our slumber, the steward had cleared the table.
Consequently, nothing indicated any forthcoming improvement in
our situation, and I seriously wondered if we were doomed to spend
the rest of our lives in this cage.
This prospect seemed increasingly painful to me because, even though
my brain was clear of its obsessions from the night before,
I was feeling an odd short-windedness in my chest. It was becoming
hard for me to breathe. The heavy air was no longer sufficient
for the full play of my lungs. Although our cell was large,
we obviously had used up most of the oxygen it contained.
In essence, over an hour's time a single human being consumes
all the oxygen found in 100 liters of air, at which point that air
has become charged with a nearly equal amount of carbon dioxide
and is no longer fit for breathing.
So it was now urgent to renew the air in our prison, and no doubt
the air in this whole underwater boat as well.
Here a question popped into my head. How did the commander of this
aquatic residence go about it? Did he obtain air using chemical methods,
releasing the oxygen contained in potassium chlorate by heating it,
meanwhile absorbing the carbon dioxide with potassium hydroxide?
If so, he would have to keep up some kind of relationship with
the shore, to come by the materials needed for such an operation.
Did he simply limit himself to storing the air in high-pressure
tanks and then dispense it according to his crew's needs?
Perhaps. Or, proceeding in a more convenient, more economical,
and consequently more probable fashion, was he satisfied with merely
returning to breathe at the surface of the water like a cetacean,
renewing his oxygen supply every twenty-four hours? In any event,
whatever his method was, it seemed prudent to me that he use this
method without delay.
In fact, I had already resorted to speeding up my inhalations in order
to extract from the cell what little oxygen it contained, when suddenly
I was refreshed by a current of clean air, scented with a salty aroma.
It had to be a sea breeze, life-giving and charged with iodine!
I opened my mouth wide, and my lungs glutted themselves
53
on the fresh particles. At the same time, I felt a swaying,
a rolling of moderate magnitude but definitely noticeable.
This boat, this sheet-iron monster, had obviously just risen to
the surface of the ocean, there to breathe in good whale fashion.
So the ship's mode of ventilation was finally established.
When I had absorbed a chestful of this clean air, I looked
for the conduit--the "air carrier," if you prefer--that allowed
this beneficial influx to reach us, and I soon found it.
Above the door opened an air vent that let in a fresh current of oxygen,
renewing the thin air in our cell.
I had gotten to this point in my observations when Ned and Conseil
woke up almost simultaneously, under the influence of this reviving
air purification. They rubbed their eyes, stretched their arms,
and sprang to their feet.
"Did master sleep well?" Conseil asked me with his perennial
good manners.
"Extremely well, my gallant lad," I replied. "And how about you,
Mr. Ned Land?"
"Like a log, professor. But I must be imagining things, because it
seems like I'm breathing a sea breeze!"
A seaman couldn't be wrong on this topic, and I told the Canadian
what had gone on while he slept.
"Good!" he said. "That explains perfectly all that bellowing we heard,
when our so-called narwhale lay in sight of the Abraham Lincoln."
"Perfectly, Mr. Land. It was catching its breath!"
"Only I've no idea what time it is, Professor Aronnax,
unless maybe it's dinnertime?"
"Dinnertime, my fine harpooner? I'd say at least breakfast time,
because we've certainly woken up to a new day."
"Which indicates," Conseil replied, "that we've spent twenty-four
hours in slumber."
"That's my assessment," I replied.
"I won't argue with you," Ned Land answered. "But dinner or breakfast,
that steward will be plenty welcome whether he brings the one
or the other."
"The one and the other," Conseil said.
"Well put," the Canadian replied. "We deserve two meals,
and speaking for myself, I'll do justice to them both."
"All right, Ned, let's wait and see!" I replied. "It's clear
that these strangers don't intend to let us die of hunger,
otherwise last evening's dinner wouldn't make any sense."
"Unless they're fattening us up!" Ned shot back.
54
"I object," I replied. "We have not fallen into the hands of cannibals."
"Just because they don't make a habit of it," the Canadian replied
in all seriousness, "doesn't mean they don't indulge from time to time.
Who knows? Maybe these people have gone without fresh meat for a
long while, and in that case three healthy, well-built specimens
like the professor, his manservant, and me ---"
"Get rid of those ideas, Mr. Land," I answered the harpooner.
"And above all, don't let them lead you to flare up against our hosts,
which would only make our situation worse."
"Anyhow," the harpooner said, "I'm as hungry as all Hades,
and dinner or breakfast, not one puny meal has arrived!"
"Mr. Land," I answered, "we have to adapt to the schedule on board,
and I imagine our stomachs are running ahead of the chief
cook's dinner bell."
"Well then, we'll adjust our stomachs to the chef's timetable!"
Conseil replied serenely.
"There you go again, Conseil my friend!" the impatient Canadian
shot back. "You never allow yourself any displays of bile or attacks
of nerves! You're everlastingly calm! You'd say your after-meal
grace even if you didn't get any food for your before-meal blessing--
and you'd starve to death rather than complain!"
"What good would it do?" Conseil asked.
"Complaining doesn't have to do good, it just feels good!
And if these pirates--I say pirates out of consideration for the
professor's feelings, since he doesn't want us to call them cannibals--
if these pirates think they're going to smother me in this cage
without hearing what cusswords spice up my outbursts, they've got
another think coming! Look here, Professor Aronnax, speak frankly.
How long do you figure they'll keep us in this iron box?"
"To tell the truth, friend Land, I know little more about it
than you do."
"But in a nutshell, what do you suppose is going on?"
"My supposition is that sheer chance has made us privy to an
important secret. Now then, if the crew of this underwater
boat have a personal interest in keeping that secret,
and if their personal interest is more important than the lives
of three men, I believe that our very existence is in jeopardy.
If such is not the case, then at the first available opportunity,
this monster that has swallowed us will return us to the world
inhabited by our own kind."
"Unless they recruit us to serve on the crew," Conseil said,
"and keep us here--"
"Till the moment," Ned Land answered, "when some frigate that's faster
or smarter than the Abraham Lincoln captures this den of buccaneers,
then hangs all of us by the neck from the tip of a mainmast yardarm!"
"Well thought out, Mr. Land," I replied. "But as yet, I don't believe
55
we've been tendered any enlistment offers. Consequently, it's pointless
to argue about what tactics we should pursue in such a case.
I repeat: let's wait, let's be guided by events, and let's do nothing,
since right now there's nothing we can do."
"On the contrary, professor," the harpooner replied, not wanting
to give in. "There is something we can do."
"Oh? And what, Mr. Land?"
"Break out of here!"
"Breaking out of a prison on shore is difficult enough, but with
an underwater prison, it strikes me as completely unworkable."
"Come now, Ned my friend," Conseil asked, "how would you answer
master's objection? I refuse to believe that an American is at
the end of his tether."
Visibly baffled, the harpooner said nothing. Under the conditions
in which fate had left us, it was absolutely impossible to escape.
But a Canadian's wit is half French, and Mr. Ned Land made this
clear in his reply.
"So, Professor Aronnax," he went on after thinking for a few moments,
"you haven't figured out what people do when they can't escape
from their prison?"
"No, my friend."
"Easy. They fix things so they stay there."
"Of course!" Conseil put in. "Since we're deep in the ocean,
being inside this boat is vastly preferable to being above it
or below it!"
"But we fix things by kicking out all the jailers, guards, and wardens,"
Ned Land added.
"What's this, Ned?" I asked. "You'd seriously consider taking
over this craft?"
"Very seriously," the Canadian replied.
"It's impossible."
"And why is that, sir? Some promising opportunity might come up,
and I don't see what could stop us from taking advantage of it.
If there are only about twenty men on board this machine, I don't
think they can stave off two Frenchmen and a Canadian!"
It seemed wiser to accept the harpooner's proposition than to debate it.
Accordingly, I was content to reply:
"Let such circumstances come, Mr. Land, and we'll see. But until then,
I beg you to control your impatience. We need to act shrewdly,
and your flare-ups won't give rise to any promising opportunities.
So swear to me that you'll accept our situation without throwing
a tantrum over it."
56
"I give you my word, professor," Ned Land replied in an
unenthusiastic tone. "No vehement phrases will leave my mouth,
no vicious gestures will give my feelings away, not even when they
don't feed us on time."
"I have your word, Ned," I answered the Canadian.
Then our conversation petered out, and each of us withdrew
into his own thoughts. For my part, despite the harpooner's
confident talk, I admit that I entertained no illusions.
I had no faith in those promising opportunities that Ned Land mentioned.
To operate with such efficiency, this underwater boat had to have
a sizeable crew, so if it came to a physical contest, we would
be facing an overwhelming opponent. Besides, before we could
do anything, we had to be free, and that we definitely were not.
I didn't see any way out of this sheet-iron, hermetically sealed cell.
And if the strange commander of this boat did have a secret to keep--
which seemed rather likely--he would never give us freedom of movement
aboard his vessel. Now then, would he resort to violence in order
to be rid of us, or would he drop us off one day on some remote coast?
There lay the unknown. All these hypotheses seemed extremely
plausible to me, and to hope for freedom through use of force,
you had to be a harpooner.
I realized, moreover, that Ned Land's brooding was getting
him madder by the minute. Little by little, I heard those
aforesaid cusswords welling up in the depths of his gullet,
and I saw his movements turn threatening again. He stood up,
pacing in circles like a wild beast in a cage, striking the walls
with his foot and fist. Meanwhile the hours passed, our hunger
nagged unmercifully, and this time the steward did not appear.
Which amounted to forgetting our castaway status for much too long,
if they really had good intentions toward us.
Tortured by the growling of his well-built stomach, Ned Land
was getting more and more riled, and despite his word of honor,
I was in real dread of an explosion when he stood in the presence
of one of the men on board.
For two more hours Ned Land's rage increased. The Canadian shouted
and pleaded, but to no avail. The sheet-iron walls were deaf.
I didn't hear a single sound inside this dead-seeming boat.
The vessel hadn't stirred, because I obviously would have felt its hull
vibrating under the influence of the propeller. It had undoubtedly
sunk into the watery deep and no longer belonged to the outside world.
All this dismal silence was terrifying.
As for our neglect, our isolation in the depths of this cell,
I was afraid to guess at how long it might last. Little by little,
hopes I had entertained after our interview with the ship's commander
were fading away. The gentleness of the man's gaze, the generosity
expressed in his facial features, the nobility of his bearing,
all vanished from my memory. I saw this mystifying individual
anew for what he inevitably must be: cruel and merciless.
I viewed him as outside humanity, beyond all feelings of compassion,
the implacable foe of his fellow man, toward whom he must have sworn
an undying hate!
But even so, was the man going to let us die of starvation,
locked up in this cramped prison, exposed to those horrible
57
temptations to which people are driven by extreme hunger?
This grim possibility took on a dreadful intensity in my mind,
and fired by my imagination, I felt an unreasoning terror run through me.
Conseil stayed calm. Ned Land bellowed.
Just then a noise was audible outside. Footsteps rang on
the metal tiling. The locks were turned, the door opened,
the steward appeared.
Before I could make a single movement to prevent him, the Canadian
rushed at the poor man, threw him down, held him by the throat.
The steward was choking in the grip of those powerful hands.
Conseil was already trying to loosen the harpooner's hands from his
half-suffocated victim, and I had gone to join in the rescue, when I
was abruptly nailed to the spot by these words pronounced in French:
"Calm down, Mr. Land! And you, professor, kindly listen to me!"
58
CHAPTER 10
The Man of the Waters
IT WAS THE ship's commander who had just spoken.
At these words Ned Land stood up quickly. Nearly strangled,
the steward staggered out at a signal from his superior;
but such was the commander's authority aboard his vessel,
not one gesture gave away the resentment that this man must have
felt toward the Canadian. In silence we waited for the outcome
of this scene; Conseil, in spite of himself, seemed almost fascinated,
I was stunned.
Arms crossed, leaning against a corner of the table, the commander
studied us with great care. Was he reluctant to speak further?
Did he regret those words he had just pronounced in French? You would
have thought so.
After a few moments of silence, which none of us would have
dreamed of interrupting:
"Gentlemen," he said in a calm, penetrating voice,
"I speak French, English, German, and Latin with equal fluency.
Hence I could have answered you as early as our initial interview,
but first I wanted to make your acquaintance and then think things over.
Your four versions of the same narrative, perfectly consistent by
and large, established your personal identities for me. I now know
that sheer chance has placed in my presence Professor Pierre Aronnax,
specialist in natural history at the Paris Museum and entrusted with
a scientific mission abroad, his manservant Conseil, and Ned Land,
a harpooner of Canadian origin aboard the Abraham Lincoln,
a frigate in the national navy of the United States of America."
I bowed in agreement. The commander hadn't put a question to me.
So no answer was called for. This man expressed himself with perfect
ease and without a trace of an accent. His phrasing was clear,
his words well chosen, his facility in elocution remarkable.
And yet, to me, he didn't have "the feel" of a fellow countryman.
He went on with the conversation as follows:
"No doubt, sir, you've felt that I waited rather too long before
paying you this second visit. After discovering your identities,
I wanted to weigh carefully what policy to pursue toward you.
I had great difficulty deciding. Some extremely inconvenient
circumstances have brought you into the presence of a man who
has cut himself off from humanity. Your coming has disrupted
my whole existence."
"Unintentionally," I said.
"Unintentionally?" the stranger replied, raising his voice a little.
"Was it unintentionally that the Abraham Lincoln hunted me on every sea?
Was it unintentionally that you traveled aboard that frigate?
Was it unintentionally that your shells bounced off my ship's hull?
59
Was it unintentionally that Mr. Ned Land hit me with his harpoon?"
I detected a controlled irritation in these words. But there was
a perfectly natural reply to these charges, and I made it.
"Sir," I said, "you're surely unaware of the discussions that have
taken place in Europe and America with yourself as the subject.
You don't realize that various accidents, caused by collisions with your
underwater machine, have aroused public passions on those two continents.
I'll spare you the innumerable hypotheses with which we've tried
to explain this inexplicable phenomenon, whose secret is yours alone.
But please understand that the Abraham Lincoln chased you over
the Pacific high seas in the belief it was hunting some powerful
marine monster, which had to be purged from the ocean at all cost."
A half smile curled the commander's lips; then, in a calmer tone:
"Professor Aronnax," he replied, "do you dare claim that your frigate
wouldn't have chased and cannonaded an underwater boat as readily
as a monster?"
This question baffled me, since Commander Farragut would certainly
have shown no such hesitation. He would have seen it as his sworn
duty to destroy a contrivance of this kind just as promptly
as a gigantic narwhale.
"So you understand, sir," the stranger went on, "that I have a right
to treat you as my enemy."
I kept quiet, with good reason. What was the use of debating such
a proposition, when superior force can wipe out the best arguments?
"It took me a good while to decide," the commander went on.
"Nothing obliged me to grant you hospitality. If I were to part company
with you, I'd have no personal interest in ever seeing you again.
I could put you back on the platform of this ship that has served
as your refuge. I could sink under the sea, and I could forget
you ever existed. Wouldn't that be my right?"
"Perhaps it would be the right of a savage," I replied.
"But not that of a civilized man."
"Professor," the commander replied swiftly, "I'm not what you
term a civilized man! I've severed all ties with society,
for reasons that I alone have the right to appreciate.
Therefore I obey none of its regulations, and I insist that you
never invoke them in front of me!"
This was plain speaking. A flash of anger and scorn lit up the
stranger's eyes, and I glimpsed a fearsome past in this man's life.
Not only had he placed himself beyond human laws, he had rendered
himself independent, out of all reach, free in the strictest sense
of the word! For who would dare chase him to the depths of the sea
when he thwarted all attacks on the surface? What ship could
withstand a collision with his underwater Monitor? What armor plate,
no matter how heavy, could bear the thrusts of his spur?
No man among men could call him to account for his actions.
God, if he believed in Him, his conscience if he had one--
these were the only judges to whom he was answerable.
60
These thoughts swiftly crossed my mind while this strange individual
fell silent, like someone completely self-absorbed. I regarded him
with a mixture of fear and fascination, in the same way, no doubt,
that Oedipus regarded the Sphinx.
After a fairly long silence, the commander went on with our conversation.
"So I had difficulty deciding," he said. "But I concluded
that my personal interests could be reconciled with that
natural compassion to which every human being has a right.
Since fate has brought you here, you'll stay aboard my vessel.
You'll be free here, and in exchange for that freedom,
moreover totally related to it, I'll lay on you just one condition.
Your word that you'll submit to it will be sufficient."
"Go on, sir," I replied. "I assume this condition is one an honest
man can accept?"
"Yes, sir. Just this. It's possible that certain unforeseen events
may force me to confine you to your cabins for some hours, or even for
some days as the case may be. Since I prefer never to use violence,
I expect from you in such a case, even more than in any other,
your unquestioning obedience. By acting in this way, I shield you
from complicity, I absolve you of all responsibility, since I myself
make it impossible for you to see what you aren't meant to see.
Do you accept this condition?"
So things happened on board that were quite odd to say the least,
things never to be seen by people not placing themselves beyond
society's laws! Among all the surprises the future had in store
for me, this would not be the mildest.
"We accept," I replied. "Only, I'll ask your permission, sir,
to address a question to you, just one."
"Go ahead, sir."
"You said we'd be free aboard your vessel?"
"Completely."
"Then I would ask what you mean by this freedom."
"Why, the freedom to come, go, see, and even closely observe
everything happening here--except under certain rare circumstances--
in short, the freedom we ourselves enjoy, my companions and I."
It was obvious that we did not understand each other.
"Pardon me, sir," I went on, "but that's merely the freedom
that every prisoner has, the freedom to pace his cell!
That's not enough for us."
"Nevertheless, it will have to do!"
"What! We must give up seeing our homeland, friends, and relatives
ever again?"
"Yes, sir. But giving up that intolerable earthly yoke that some
men call freedom is perhaps less painful than you think!"
61
"By thunder!" Ned Land shouted. "I'll never promise I won't try
getting out of here!"
"I didn't ask for such a promise, Mr. Land," the commander replied coldly.
"Sir," I replied, flaring up in spite of myself, "you're taking
unfair advantage of us! This is sheer cruelty!"
"No, sir, it's an act of mercy! You're my prisoners of war!
I've cared for you when, with a single word, I could plunge you back
into the ocean depths! You attacked me! You've just stumbled on
a secret no living man must probe, the secret of my entire existence!
Do you think I'll send you back to a world that must know nothing
more of me? Never! By keeping you on board, it isn't you whom I
care for, it's me!"
These words indicated that the commander pursued a policy
impervious to arguments.
"Then, sir," I went on, "you give us, quite simply, a choice between
life and death?"
"Quite simply."
"My friends," I said, "to a question couched in these terms,
our answer can be taken for granted. But no solemn promises bind
us to the commander of this vessel."
"None, sir," the stranger replied.
Then, in a gentler voice, he went on:
"Now, allow me to finish what I have to tell you. I've heard of you,
Professor Aronnax. You, if not your companions, won't perhaps complain
too much about the stroke of fate that has brought us together.
Among the books that make up my favorite reading, you'll find the work
you've published on the great ocean depths. I've pored over it.
You've taken your studies as far as terrestrial science can go.
But you don't know everything because you haven't seen everything.
Let me tell you, professor, you won't regret the time you spend
aboard my vessel. You're going to voyage through a land of wonders.
Stunned amazement will probably be your habitual state of mind.
It will be a long while before you tire of the sights constantly before
your eyes. I'm going to make another underwater tour of the world--
perhaps my last, who knows?--and I'll review everything I've studied
in the depths of these seas that I've crossed so often, and you
can be my fellow student. Starting this very day, you'll enter
a new element, you'll see what no human being has ever seen before--
since my men and I no longer count--and thanks to me, you're going
to learn the ultimate secrets of our planet."
I can't deny it; the commander's words had a tremendous effect on me.
He had caught me on my weak side, and I momentarily forgot that not
even this sublime experience was worth the loss of my freedom.
Besides, I counted on the future to resolve this important question.
So I was content to reply:
"Sir, even though you've cut yourself off from humanity, I can
see that you haven't disowned all human feeling. We're castaways
62
whom you've charitably taken aboard, we'll never forget that.
Speaking for myself, I don't rule out that the interests of science
could override even the need for freedom, which promises me that,
in exchange, our encounter will provide great rewards."
I thought the commander would offer me his hand, to seal our agreement.
He did nothing of the sort. I regretted that.
"One last question," I said, just as this inexplicable being seemed
ready to withdraw.
"Ask it, professor."
"By what name am I to call you?"
"Sir," the commander replied, "to you, I'm simply Captain Nemo;* to me,
you and your companions are simply passengers on the Nautilus."
*Latin: nemo means "no one." Ed.
Captain Nemo called out. A steward appeared. The captain gave
him his orders in that strange language I couldn't even identify.
Then, turning to the Canadian and Conseil:
"A meal is waiting for you in your cabin," he told them.
"Kindly follow this man."
"That's an offer I can't refuse!" the harpooner replied.
After being confined for over thirty hours, he and Conseil were
finally out of this cell.
"And now, Professor Aronnax, our own breakfast is ready.
Allow me to lead the way."
"Yours to command, captain."
I followed Captain Nemo, and as soon as I passed through the doorway,
I went down a kind of electrically lit passageway that resembled
a gangway on a ship. After a stretch of some ten meters, a second
door opened before me.
I then entered a dining room, decorated and furnished in austere
good taste. Inlaid with ebony trim, tall oaken sideboards stood at
both ends of this room, and sparkling on their shelves were staggered
rows of earthenware, porcelain, and glass of incalculable value.
There silver-plated dinnerware gleamed under rays pouring from light
fixtures in the ceiling, whose glare was softened and tempered
by delicately painted designs.
In the center of this room stood a table, richly spread.
Captain Nemo indicated the place I was to occupy.
"Be seated," he told me, "and eat like the famished man you must be."
Our breakfast consisted of several dishes whose contents
were all supplied by the sea, and some foods whose nature
and derivation were unknown to me. They were good, I admit,
but with a peculiar flavor to which I would soon grow accustomed.
These various food items seemed to be rich in phosphorous, and I
63
thought that they, too, must have been of marine origin.
Captain Nemo stared at me. I had asked him nothing, but he read
my thoughts, and on his own he answered the questions I was itching
to address him.
"Most of these dishes are new to you," he told me. "But you can
consume them without fear. They're healthy and nourishing.
I renounced terrestrial foods long ago, and I'm none the worse for it.
My crew are strong and full of energy, and they eat what I eat."
"So," I said, "all these foods are products of the sea?"
"Yes, professor, the sea supplies all my needs. Sometimes I cast my nets
in our wake, and I pull them up ready to burst. Sometimes I go hunting
right in the midst of this element that has long seemed so far out of
man's reach, and I corner the game that dwells in my underwater forests.
Like the flocks of old Proteus, King Neptune's shepherd,
my herds graze without fear on the ocean's immense prairies.
There I own vast properties that I harvest myself, and which are
forever sown by the hand of the Creator of All Things."
I stared at Captain Nemo in definite astonishment, and I answered him:
"Sir, I understand perfectly how your nets can furnish excellent
fish for your table; I understand less how you can chase aquatic
game in your underwater forests; but how a piece of red meat,
no matter how small, can figure in your menu, that I don't
understand at all."
"Nor I, sir," Captain Nemo answered me. "I never touch the flesh
of land animals."
"Nevertheless, this . . . ," I went on, pointing to a dish where
some slices of loin were still left.
"What you believe to be red meat, professor, is nothing other than loin
of sea turtle. Similarly, here are some dolphin livers you might mistake
for stewed pork. My chef is a skillful food processor who excels
at pickling and preserving these various exhibits from the ocean.
Feel free to sample all of these foods. Here are some preserves
of sea cucumber that a Malaysian would declare to be unrivaled
in the entire world, here's cream from milk furnished by the udders
of cetaceans, and sugar from the huge fucus plants in the North Sea;
and finally, allow me to offer you some marmalade of sea anemone,
equal to that from the tastiest fruits."
So I sampled away, more as a curiosity seeker than an epicure,
while Captain Nemo delighted me with his incredible anecdotes.
"But this sea, Professor Aronnax," he told me, "this prodigious,
inexhaustible wet nurse of a sea not only feeds me, she dresses
me as well. That fabric covering you was woven from the masses
of filaments that anchor certain seashells; as the ancients
were wont to do, it was dyed with purple ink from the murex snail
and shaded with violet tints that I extract from a marine slug,
the Mediterranean sea hare. The perfumes you'll find on the washstand
in your cabin were produced from the oozings of marine plants.
Your mattress was made from the ocean's softest eelgrass.
Your quill pen will be whalebone, your ink a juice secreted
64
by cuttlefish or squid. Everything comes to me from the sea,
just as someday everything will return to it!"
"You love the sea, captain."
"Yes, I love it! The sea is the be all and end all! It covers
seven-tenths of the planet earth. Its breath is clean and healthy.
It's an immense wilderness where a man is never lonely, because he
feels life astir on every side. The sea is simply the vehicle
for a prodigious, unearthly mode of existence; it's simply movement
and love; it's living infinity, as one of your poets put it.
And in essence, professor, nature is here made manifest
by all three of her kingdoms, mineral, vegetable, and animal.
The last of these is amply represented by the four zoophyte groups,
three classes of articulates, five classes of mollusks, and three
vertebrate classes: mammals, reptiles, and those countless
legions of fish, an infinite order of animals totaling more than
13,000 species, of which only one-tenth belong to fresh water.
The sea is a vast pool of nature. Our globe began with the sea,
so to speak, and who can say we won't end with it!
Here lies supreme tranquility. The sea doesn't belong to tyrants.
On its surface they can still exercise their iniquitous claims,
battle each other, devour each other, haul every earthly horror.
But thirty feet below sea level, their dominion ceases,
their influence fades, their power vanishes! Ah, sir, live!
Live in the heart of the seas! Here alone lies independence!
Here I recognize no superiors! Here I'm free!"
Captain Nemo suddenly fell silent in the midst of this
enthusiastic outpouring. Had he let himself get carried away,
past the bounds of his habitual reserve? Had he said too much?
For a few moments he strolled up and down, all aquiver.
Then his nerves grew calmer, his facial features recovered their
usual icy composure, and turning to me:
"Now, professor," he said, "if you'd like to inspect the Nautilus, I'm
yours to command."
65
CHAPTER 11
The Nautilus
CAPTAIN NEMO stood up. I followed him. Contrived at the rear
of the dining room, a double door opened, and I entered a room
whose dimensions equaled the one I had just left.
It was a library. Tall, black-rosewood bookcases, inlaid with copperwork,
held on their wide shelves a large number of uniformly bound books.
These furnishings followed the contours of the room, their lower
parts leading to huge couches upholstered in maroon leather
and curved for maximum comfort. Light, movable reading stands,
which could be pushed away or pulled near as desired,
allowed books to be positioned on them for easy study.
In the center stood a huge table covered with pamphlets,
among which some newspapers, long out of date, were visible.
Electric light flooded this whole harmonious totality, falling from
four frosted half globes set in the scrollwork of the ceiling.
I stared in genuine wonderment at this room so ingeniously laid out,
and I couldn't believe my eyes.
"Captain Nemo," I told my host, who had just stretched out on
a couch, "this is a library that would do credit to more than one
continental palace, and I truly marvel to think it can go with you
into the deepest seas."
"Where could one find greater silence or solitude, professor?"
Captain Nemo replied. "Did your study at the museum afford you
such a perfect retreat?"
"No, sir, and I might add that it's quite a humble one next to yours.
You own 6,000 or 7,000 volumes here . . ."
"12,000, Professor Aronnax. They're my sole remaining ties
with dry land. But I was done with the shore the day my Nautilus
submerged for the first time under the waters. That day I purchased
my last volumes, my last pamphlets, my last newspapers, and ever
since I've chosen to believe that humanity no longer thinks or writes.
In any event, professor, these books are at your disposal, and you
may use them freely."
I thanked Captain Nemo and approached the shelves of this library.
Written in every language, books on science, ethics, and literature
were there in abundance, but I didn't see a single work on economics--
they seemed to be strictly banned on board. One odd detail:
all these books were shelved indiscriminately without regard
to the language in which they were written, and this jumble proved
that the Nautilus's captain could read fluently whatever volumes
he chanced to pick up.
Among these books I noted masterpieces by the greats of ancient
and modern times, in other words, all of humanity's finest
achievements in history, poetry, fiction, and science,
from Homer to Victor Hugo, from Xenophon to Michelet,
from Rabelais to Madame George Sand. But science, in particular,
66
represented the major investment of this library: books on mechanics,
ballistics, hydrography, meteorology, geography, geology, etc., held
a place there no less important than works on natural history,
and I realized that they made up the captain's chief reading.
There I saw the complete works of Humboldt, the complete Arago,
as well as works by Foucault, Henri Sainte-Claire Deville, Chasles,
Milne-Edwards, Quatrefages, John Tyndall, Faraday, Berthelot,
Father Secchi, Petermann, Commander Maury, Louis Agassiz,
etc., plus the transactions of France's Academy of Sciences,
bulletins from the various geographical societies, etc., and in
a prime location, those two volumes on the great ocean depths
that had perhaps earned me this comparatively charitable welcome
from Captain Nemo. Among the works of Joseph Bertrand, his book
entitled The Founders of Astronomy even gave me a definite date;
and since I knew it had appeared in the course of 1865, I concluded
that the fitting out of the Nautilus hadn't taken place before then.
Accordingly, three years ago at the most, Captain Nemo had begun
his underwater existence. Moreover, I hoped some books even
more recent would permit me to pinpoint the date precisely;
but I had plenty of time to look for them, and I didn't want to put
off any longer our stroll through the wonders of the Nautilus.
"Sir," I told the captain, "thank you for placing this library
at my disposal. There are scientific treasures here, and I'll take
advantage of them."
"This room isn't only a library," Captain Nemo said, "it's also
a smoking room."
"A smoking room?" I exclaimed. "Then one may smoke on board?"
"Surely."
"In that case, sir, I'm forced to believe that you've kept up
relations with Havana."
"None whatever," the captain replied. "Try this cigar,
Professor Aronnax, and even though it doesn't come from Havana,
it will satisfy you if you're a connoisseur."
I took the cigar offered me, whose shape recalled those from Cuba;
but it seemed to be made of gold leaf. I lit it at a small brazier
supported by an elegant bronze stand, and I inhaled my first whiffs
with the relish of a smoker who hasn't had a puff in days.
"It's excellent," I said, "but it's not from the tobacco plant."
"Right," the captain replied, "this tobacco comes from neither
Havana nor the Orient. It's a kind of nicotine-rich seaweed
that the ocean supplies me, albeit sparingly. Do you still miss
your Cubans, sir?"
"Captain, I scorn them from this day forward."
"Then smoke these cigars whenever you like, without debating
their origin. They bear no government seal of approval, but I
imagine they're none the worse for it."
"On the contrary."
67
Just then Captain Nemo opened a door facing the one by which I had entered
the library, and I passed into an immense, splendidly lit lounge.
It was a huge quadrilateral with canted corners, ten meters long,
six wide, five high. A luminous ceiling, decorated with
delicate arabesques, distributed a soft, clear daylight over all
the wonders gathered in this museum. For a museum it truly was,
in which clever hands had spared no expense to amass every natural
and artistic treasure, displaying them with the helter-skelter
picturesqueness that distinguishes a painter's studio.
Some thirty pictures by the masters, uniformly framed and separated
by gleaming panoplies of arms, adorned walls on which were stretched
tapestries of austere design. There I saw canvases of the highest value,
the likes of which I had marveled at in private European collections
and art exhibitions. The various schools of the old masters
were represented by a Raphael Madonna, a Virgin by Leonardo
da Vinci, a nymph by Correggio, a woman by Titian, an adoration
of the Magi by Veronese, an assumption of the Virgin by Murillo,
a Holbein portrait, a monk by Velazquez, a martyr by Ribera,
a village fair by Rubens, two Flemish landscapes by Teniers,
three little genre paintings by Gerard Dow, Metsu, and Paul Potter,
two canvases by Gericault and Prud'hon, plus seascapes by Backhuysen
and Vernet. Among the works of modern art were pictures signed
by Delacroix, Ingres, Decamps, Troyon, Meissonier, Daubigny,
etc., and some wonderful miniature statues in marble or bronze,
modeled after antiquity's finest originals, stood on their pedestals
in the corners of this magnificent museum. As the Nautilus's
commander had predicted, my mind was already starting to fall
into that promised state of stunned amazement.
"Professor," this strange man then said, "you must excuse
the informality with which I receive you, and the disorder reigning
in this lounge."
"Sir," I replied, "without prying into who you are, might I venture
to identify you as an artist?"
"A collector, sir, nothing more. Formerly I loved acquiring
these beautiful works created by the hand of man.
I sought them greedily, ferreted them out tirelessly,
and I've been able to gather some objects of great value.
They're my last mementos of those shores that are now dead for me.
In my eyes, your modern artists are already as old as the ancients.
They've existed for 2,000 or 3,000 years, and I mix them up in my mind.
The masters are ageless."
"What about these composers?" I said, pointing to sheet music
by Weber, Rossini, Mozart, Beethoven, Haydn, Meyerbeer, Hérold, Wagner,
Auber, Gounod, Victor Massé, and a number of others scattered
over a full size piano-organ, which occupied one of the wall panels
in this lounge.
"These composers," Captain Nemo answered me, "are the contemporaries
of Orpheus, because in the annals of the dead, all chronological
differences fade; and I'm dead, professor, quite as dead as those
friends of yours sleeping six feet under!"
Captain Nemo fell silent and seemed lost in reverie. I regarded him with
68
intense excitement, silently analyzing his strange facial expression.
Leaning his elbow on the corner of a valuable mosaic table,
he no longer saw me, he had forgotten my very presence.
I didn't disturb his meditations but continued to pass in review
the curiosities that enriched this lounge.
After the works of art, natural rarities predominated.
They consisted chiefly of plants, shells, and other exhibits from
the ocean that must have been Captain Nemo's own personal finds.
In the middle of the lounge, a jet of water, electrically lit,
fell back into a basin made from a single giant clam. The delicately
festooned rim of this shell, supplied by the biggest mollusk
in the class Acephala, measured about six meters in circumference;
so it was even bigger than those fine giant clams given to King François I
by the Republic of Venice, and which the Church of Saint-Sulpice
in Paris has made into two gigantic holy-water fonts.
Around this basin, inside elegant glass cases fastened with
copper bands, there were classified and labeled the most valuable
marine exhibits ever put before the eyes of a naturalist.
My professorial glee may easily be imagined.
The zoophyte branch offered some very unusual specimens from its
two groups, the polyps and the echinoderms. In the first group:
organ-pipe coral, gorgonian coral arranged into fan shapes,
soft sponges from Syria, isis coral from the Molucca Islands,
sea-pen coral, wonderful coral of the genus Virgularia from
the waters of Norway, various coral of the genus Umbellularia,
alcyonarian coral, then a whole series of those madrepores that my mentor
Professor Milne-Edwards has so shrewdly classified into divisions
and among which I noted the wonderful genus Flabellina as well as
the genus Oculina from Réunion Island, plus a "Neptune's chariot"
from the Caribbean Sea--every superb variety of coral, and in short,
every species of these unusual polyparies that congregate
to form entire islands that will one day turn into continents.
Among the echinoderms, notable for being covered with spines:
starfish, feather stars, sea lilies, free-swimming crinoids,
brittle stars, sea urchins, sea cucumbers, etc., represented
a complete collection of the individuals in this group.
An excitable conchologist would surely have fainted dead away
before other, more numerous glass cases in which were classified
specimens from the mollusk branch. There I saw a collection
of incalculable value that I haven't time to describe completely.
Among these exhibits I'll mention, just for the record:
an elegant royal hammer shell from the Indian Ocean, whose evenly
spaced white spots stood out sharply against a base of red and brown;
an imperial spiny oyster, brightly colored, bristling with thorns,
a specimen rare to European museums, whose value I estimated at
20,000 francs; a common hammer shell from the seas near Queensland,
very hard to come by; exotic cockles from Senegal, fragile white
bivalve shells that a single breath could pop like a soap bubble;
several varieties of watering-pot shell from Java, a sort of limestone
tube fringed with leafy folds and much fought over by collectors;
a whole series of top-shell snails--greenish yellow ones fished up
from American seas, others colored reddish brown that patronize
the waters off Queensland, the former coming from the Gulf
of Mexico and notable for their overlapping shells, the latter
some sun-carrier shells found in the southernmost seas, finally and
69
rarest of all, the magnificent spurred-star shell from New Zealand;
then some wonderful peppery-furrow shells; several valuable species
of cythera clams and venus clams; the trellis wentletrap snail from
Tranquebar on India's eastern shore; a marbled turban snail gleaming
with mother-of-pearl; green parrot shells from the seas of China;
the virtually unknown cone snail from the genus Coenodullus;
every variety of cowry used as money in India and Africa;
a "glory-of-the-seas," the most valuable shell in the East Indies;
finally, common periwinkles, delphinula snails, turret snails,
violet snails, European cowries, volute snails, olive shells,
miter shells, helmet shells, murex snails, whelks, harp shells,
spiky periwinkles, triton snails, horn shells, spindle shells,
conch shells, spider conchs, limpets, glass snails, sea butterflies--
every kind of delicate, fragile seashell that science has baptized
with its most delightful names.
Aside and in special compartments, strings of supremely beautiful
pearls were spread out, the electric light flecking them with
little fiery sparks: pink pearls pulled from saltwater fan
shells in the Red Sea; green pearls from the rainbow abalone;
yellow, blue, and black pearls, the unusual handiwork of various
mollusks from every ocean and of certain mussels from rivers up north;
in short, several specimens of incalculable worth that had been
oozed by the rarest of shellfish. Some of these pearls were
bigger than a pigeon egg; they more than equaled the one that
the explorer Tavernier sold the Shah of Persia for 3,000,000 francs,
and they surpassed that other pearl owned by the Imam of Muscat,
which I had believed to be unrivaled in the entire world.
Consequently, to calculate the value of this collection was,
I should say, impossible. Captain Nemo must have spent millions
in acquiring these different specimens, and I was wondering what
financial resources he tapped to satisfy his collector's fancies,
when these words interrupted me:
"You're examining my shells, professor? They're indeed able
to fascinate a naturalist; but for me they have an added charm,
since I've collected every one of them with my own two hands,
and not a sea on the globe has escaped my investigations."
"I understand, captain, I understand your delight at strolling
in the midst of this wealth. You're a man who gathers his
treasure in person. No museum in Europe owns such a collection
of exhibits from the ocean. But if I exhaust all my wonderment
on them, I'll have nothing left for the ship that carries them!
I have absolutely no wish to probe those secrets of yours!
But I confess that my curiosity is aroused to the limit by this Nautilus,
the motor power it contains, the equipment enabling it to operate,
the ultra powerful force that brings it to life. I see some instruments
hanging on the walls of this lounge whose purposes are unknown to me.
May I learn--"
"Professor Aronnax," Captain Nemo answered me, "I've said you'd be free
aboard my vessel, so no part of the Nautilus is off-limits to you.
You may inspect it in detail, and I'll be delighted to act
as your guide."
"I don't know how to thank you, sir, but I won't abuse your good nature.
I would only ask you about the uses intended for these instruments
of physical measure--"
70
"Professor, these same instruments are found in my stateroom,
where I'll have the pleasure of explaining their functions to you.
But beforehand, come inspect the cabin set aside for you.
You need to learn how you'll be lodged aboard the Nautilus."
I followed Captain Nemo, who, via one of the doors cut into
the lounge's canted corners, led me back down the ship's gangways.
He took me to the bow, and there I found not just a cabin but an elegant
stateroom with a bed, a washstand, and various other furnishings.
I could only thank my host.
"Your stateroom adjoins mine," he told me, opening a door,
"and mine leads into that lounge we've just left."
I entered the captain's stateroom. It had an austere,
almost monastic appearance. An iron bedstead, a worktable,
some washstand fixtures. Subdued lighting. No luxuries.
Just the bare necessities.
Captain Nemo showed me to a bench.
"Kindly be seated," he told me.
I sat, and he began speaking as follows:
71
CHAPTER 12
Everything through Electricity
"SIR," CAPTAIN NEMO SAID, showing me the instruments hanging on
the walls of his stateroom,
"these are the devices needed to navigate the Nautilus. Here, as in
the lounge, I always have them before my eyes, and they indicate
my position and exact heading in the midst of the ocean.
You're familiar with some of them, such as the thermometer,
which gives the temperature inside the Nautilus; the barometer,
which measures the heaviness of the outside air and forecasts changes
in the weather; the humidistat, which indicates the degree of dryness
in the atmosphere; the storm glass, whose mixture decomposes to
foretell the arrival of tempests; the compass, which steers my course;
the sextant, which takes the sun's altitude and tells me my latitude;
chronometers, which allow me to calculate my longitude; and finally,
spyglasses for both day and night, enabling me to scrutinize every
point of the horizon once the Nautilus has risen to the surface
of the waves."
"These are the normal navigational instruments," I replied,
"and I'm familiar with their uses. But no doubt these others answer
pressing needs unique to the Nautilus. That dial I see there,
with the needle moving across it--isn't it a pressure gauge?"
"It is indeed a pressure gauge. It's placed in contact with the water,
and it indicates the outside pressure on our hull, which in turn
gives me the depth at which my submersible is sitting."
"And these are some new breed of sounding line?"
"They're thermometric sounding lines that report water temperatures
in the different strata."
"And these other instruments, whose functions I can't even guess?"
"Here, professor, I need to give you some background information,"
Captain Nemo said. "So kindly hear me out."
He fell silent for some moments, then he said:
"There's a powerful, obedient, swift, and effortless force that can
be bent to any use and which reigns supreme aboard my vessel.
It does everything. It lights me, it warms me, it's the soul
of my mechanical equipment. This force is electricity."
"Electricity!" I exclaimed in some surprise.
"Yes, sir."
"But, captain, you have a tremendous speed of movement that doesn't
square with the strength of electricity. Until now, its dynamic
potential has remained quite limited, capable of producing only small
amounts of power!"
72
"Professor," Captain Nemo replied, "my electricity isn't
the run-of-the-mill variety, and with your permission, I'll leave
it at that."
"I won't insist, sir, and I'll rest content with simply being
flabbergasted at your results. I would ask one question, however,
which you needn't answer if it's indiscreet. The electric cells you
use to generate this marvelous force must be depleted very quickly.
Their zinc component, for example: how do you replace it,
since you no longer stay in contact with the shore?"
"That question deserves an answer," Captain Nemo replied.
"First off, I'll mention that at the bottom of the sea there exist veins
of zinc, iron, silver, and gold whose mining would quite certainly
be feasible. But I've tapped none of these land-based metals,
and I wanted to make demands only on the sea itself for the sources
of my electricity."
"The sea itself?"
"Yes, professor, and there was no shortage of such sources.
In fact, by establishing a circuit between two wires immersed
to different depths, I'd be able to obtain electricity through
the diverging temperatures they experience; but I preferred to use
a more practical procedure."
"And that is?"
"You're familiar with the composition of salt water. In 1,000 grams
one finds 96.5% water and about 2.66% sodium chloride; then small
quantities of magnesium chloride, potassium chloride, magnesium bromide,
sulfate of magnesia, calcium sulfate, and calcium carbonate.
Hence you observe that sodium chloride is encountered there in
significant proportions. Now then, it's this sodium that I extract
from salt water and with which I compose my electric cells."
"Sodium?"
"Yes, sir. Mixed with mercury, it forms an amalgam that takes
the place of zinc in Bunsen cells. The mercury is never depleted.
Only the sodium is consumed, and the sea itself gives me that.
Beyond this, I'll mention that sodium batteries have been found
to generate the greater energy, and their electro-motor strength
is twice that of zinc batteries."
"Captain, I fully understand the excellence of sodium under the conditions
in which you're placed. The sea contains it. Fine. But it still has
to be produced, in short, extracted. And how do you accomplish this?
Obviously your batteries could do the extracting; but if I'm
not mistaken, the consumption of sodium needed by your electric
equipment would be greater than the quantity you'd extract.
It would come about, then, that in the process of producing your sodium,
you'd use up more than you'd make!"
"Accordingly, professor, I don't extract it with batteries;
quite simply, I utilize the heat of coal from the earth."
"From the earth?" I said, my voice going up on the word.
73
"We'll say coal from the seafloor, if you prefer," Captain Nemo replied.
"And you can mine these veins of underwater coal?"
"You'll watch me work them, Professor Aronnax. I ask only a little
patience of you, since you'll have ample time to be patient.
Just remember one thing: I owe everything to the ocean;
it generates electricity, and electricity gives the Nautilus heat,
light, motion, and, in a word, life itself."
"But not the air you breathe?"
"Oh, I could produce the air needed on board, but it would be pointless,
since I can rise to the surface of the sea whenever I like.
However, even though electricity doesn't supply me with breathable air,
it at least operates the powerful pumps that store it under pressure
in special tanks; which, if need be, allows me to extend my stay
in the lower strata for as long as I want."
"Captain," I replied, "I'll rest content with marveling.
You've obviously found what all mankind will surely find one day,
the true dynamic power of electricity."
"I'm not so certain they'll find it," Captain Nemo replied icily.
"But be that as it may, you're already familiar with the first use I've
found for this valuable force. It lights us, and with a uniformity
and continuity not even possessed by sunlight. Now, look at that clock:
it's electric, it runs with an accuracy rivaling the finest chronometers.
I've had it divided into twenty-four hours like Italian clocks,
since neither day nor night, sun nor moon, exist for me, but only
this artificial light that I import into the depths of the seas!
See, right now it's ten o'clock in the morning."
"That's perfect."
"Another use for electricity: that dial hanging before our eyes
indicates how fast the Nautilus is going. An electric wire puts
it in contact with the patent log; this needle shows me the actual
speed of my submersible. And . . . hold on . . . just now we're
proceeding at the moderate pace of fifteen miles per hour."
"It's marvelous," I replied, "and I truly see, captain, how right
you are to use this force; it's sure to take the place of wind,
water, and steam."
"But that's not all, Professor Aronnax," Captain Nemo said, standing up.
"And if you'd care to follow me, we'll inspect the Nautilus's stern."
In essence, I was already familiar with the whole forward part
of this underwater boat, and here are its exact subdivisions going
from amidships to its spur: the dining room, 5 meters long and
separated from the library by a watertight bulkhead, in other words,
it couldn't be penetrated by the sea; the library, 5 meters long;
the main lounge, 10 meters long, separated from the captain's
stateroom by a second watertight bulkhead; the aforesaid stateroom,
5 meters long; mine, 2.5 meters long; and finally, air tanks 7.5 meters
long and extending to the stempost. Total: a length of 35 meters.
Doors were cut into the watertight bulkheads and were shut hermetically
by means of india-rubber seals, which insured complete safety aboard
the Nautilus in the event of a leak in any one section.
74
I followed Captain Nemo down gangways located for easy transit,
and I arrived amidships. There I found a sort of shaft heading upward
between two watertight bulkheads. An iron ladder, clamped to the wall,
led to the shaft's upper end. I asked the captain what this
ladder was for.
"It goes to the skiff," he replied.
"What! You have a skiff?" I replied in some astonishment.
"Surely. An excellent longboat, light and unsinkable, which is used
for excursions and fishing trips."
"But when you want to set out, don't you have to return to the surface
of the sea?"
"By no means. The skiff is attached to the topside of the Nautilus's hull
and is set in a cavity expressly designed to receive it. It's completely
decked over, absolutely watertight, and held solidly in place by bolts.
This ladder leads to a manhole cut into the Nautilus's hull and
corresponding to a comparable hole cut into the side of the skiff.
I insert myself through this double opening into the longboat.
My crew close up the hole belonging to the Nautilus; I close up
the one belonging to the skiff, simply by screwing it into place.
I undo the bolts holding the skiff to the submersible, and the
longboat rises with prodigious speed to the surface of the sea.
I then open the deck paneling, carefully closed until that point;
I up mast and hoist sail--or I take out my oars--and I go for a spin."
"But how do you return to the ship?"
"I don't, Professor Aronnax; the Nautilus returns to me."
"At your command?"
"At my command. An electric wire connects me to the ship.
I fire off a telegram, and that's that."
"Right," I said, tipsy from all these wonders, "nothing to it!"
After passing the well of the companionway that led to the platform,
I saw a cabin 2 meters long in which Conseil and Ned Land,
enraptured with their meal, were busy devouring it to the last crumb.
Then a door opened into the galley, 3 meters long and located
between the vessel's huge storage lockers.
There, even more powerful and obedient than gas, electricity did
most of the cooking. Arriving under the stoves, wires transmitted
to platinum griddles a heat that was distributed and sustained
with perfect consistency. It also heated a distilling
mechanism that, via evaporation, supplied excellent drinking water.
Next to this galley was a bathroom, conveniently laid out,
with faucets supplying hot or cold water at will.
After the galley came the crew's quarters, 5 meters long.
But the door was closed and I couldn't see its accommodations, which might
have told me the number of men it took to operate the Nautilus.
At the far end stood a fourth watertight bulkhead, separating the crew's
75
quarters from the engine room. A door opened, and I stood in the
compartment where Captain Nemo, indisputably a world-class engineer,
had set up his locomotive equipment.
Brightly lit, the engine room measured at least 20 meters in length.
It was divided, by function, into two parts: the first contained
the cells for generating electricity, the second that mechanism
transmitting movement to the propeller.
Right off, I detected an odor permeating the compartment that was
sui generis.* Captain Nemo noticed the negative impression it
made on me.
*Latin: "in a class by itself." Ed.
"That," he told me, "is a gaseous discharge caused by our use of sodium,
but it's only a mild inconvenience. In any event, every morning
we sanitize the ship by ventilating it in the open air."
Meanwhile I examined the Nautilus's engine with a fascination
easy to imagine.
"You observe," Captain Nemo told me, "that I use Bunsen cells,
not Ruhmkorff cells. The latter would be ineffectual. One uses fewer
Bunsen cells, but they're big and strong, and experience has proven
their superiority. The electricity generated here makes its way to
the stern, where electromagnets of huge size activate a special system
of levers and gears that transmit movement to the propeller's shaft.
The latter has a diameter of 6 meters, a pitch of 7.5 meters,
and can do up to 120 revolutions per minute."
"And that gives you?"
"A speed of fifty miles per hour."
There lay a mystery, but I didn't insist on exploring it.
How could electricity work with such power? Where did this
nearly unlimited energy originate? Was it in the extraordinary
voltage obtained from some new kind of induction coil?
Could its transmission have been immeasurably increased by some
unknown system of levers?** This was the point I couldn't grasp.
**Author's Note: And sure enough, there's now talk of such a discovery,
in which a new set of levers generates considerable power.
Did its inventor meet up with Captain Nemo?
"Captain Nemo," I said, "I'll vouch for the results and not try
to explain them. I've seen the Nautilus at work out in front
of the Abraham Lincoln, and I know where I stand on its speed.
But it isn't enough just to move, we have to see where we're going!
We must be able to steer right or left, up or down!
How do you reach the lower depths, where you meet an increasing
resistance that's assessed in hundreds of atmospheres?
How do you rise back to the surface of the ocean?
Finally, how do you keep your ship at whatever level suits you?
Am I indiscreet in asking you all these things?"
"Not at all, professor," the captain answered me after a
slight hesitation, "since you'll never leave this underwater boat.
Come into the lounge. It's actually our work room, and there you'll
76
learn the full story about the Nautilus!"
77
CHAPTER 13
Some Figures
A MOMENT LATER we were seated on a couch in the lounge, cigars between
our lips. The
captain placed before my eyes a working drawing that gave the ground plan,
cross section, and side view of the Nautilus. Then he began his
description as follows:
"Here, Professor Aronnax, are the different dimensions of this boat
now transporting you. It's a very long cylinder with conical ends.
It noticeably takes the shape of a cigar, a shape already
adopted in London for several projects of the same kind.
The length of this cylinder from end to end is exactly seventy meters,
and its maximum breadth of beam is eight meters. So it isn't
quite built on the ten-to-one ratio of your high-speed steamers;
but its lines are sufficiently long, and their tapering gradual enough,
so that the displaced water easily slips past and poses no obstacle
to the ship's movements.
"These two dimensions allow you to obtain, via a simple calculation,
the surface area and volume of the Nautilus. Its surface area
totals 1,011.45 square meters, its volume 1,507.2 cubic meters--
which is tantamount to saying that when it's completely submerged,
it displaces 1,500 cubic meters of water, or weighs 1,500 metric tons.
"In drawing up plans for a ship meant to navigate underwater,
I wanted it, when floating on the waves, to lie nine-tenths below
the surface and to emerge only one-tenth. Consequently, under these
conditions it needed to displace only nine-tenths of its volume,
hence 1,356.48 cubic meters; in other words, it was to weigh only
that same number of metric tons. So I was obliged not to exceed
this weight while building it to the aforesaid dimensions.
"The Nautilus is made up of two hulls, one inside the other;
between them, joining them together, are iron T-bars that give this ship
the utmost rigidity. In fact, thanks to this cellular arrangement,
it has the resistance of a stone block, as if it were completely solid.
Its plating can't give way; it's self-adhering and not dependent
on the tightness of its rivets; and due to the perfect union
of its materials, the solidarity of its construction allows it
to defy the most violent seas.
"The two hulls are manufactured from boilerplate steel, whose relative
density is 7.8 times that of water. The first hull has a thickness
of no less than five centimeters and weighs 394.96 metric tons.
My second hull, the outer cover, includes a keel fifty centimeters high
by twenty-five wide, which by itself weighs 62 metric tons; this hull,
the engine, the ballast, the various accessories and accommodations,
plus the bulkheads and interior braces, have a combined weight
of 961.52 metric tons, which when added to 394.96 metric tons,
gives us the desired total of 1,356.48 metric tons. Clear?"
"Clear," I replied.
78
"So," the captain went on, "when the Nautilus lies on the waves
under these conditions, one-tenth of it does emerge above water.
Now then, if I provide some ballast tanks equal in capacity
to that one-tenth, hence able to hold 150.72 metric tons, and if I
fill them with water, the boat then displaces 1,507.2 metric tons--
or it weighs that much--and it would be completely submerged.
That's what comes about, professor. These ballast tanks exist
within easy access in the lower reaches of the Nautilus. I open
some stopcocks, the tanks fill, the boat sinks, and it's exactly
flush with the surface of the water."
"Fine, captain, but now we come to a genuine difficulty. You're able
to lie flush with the surface of the ocean, that I understand.
But lower down, while diving beneath that surface, isn't your
submersible going to encounter a pressure, and consequently
undergo an upward thrust, that must be assessed at one atmosphere
per every thirty feet of water, hence at about one kilogram per
each square centimeter?"
"Precisely, sir."
"Then unless you fill up the whole Nautilus, I don't see how you
can force it down into the heart of these liquid masses."
"Professor," Captain Nemo replied, "static objects mustn't be
confused with dynamic ones, or we'll be open to serious error.
Comparatively little effort is spent in reaching the ocean's
lower regions, because all objects have a tendency to become 'sinkers.'
Follow my logic here."
"I'm all ears, captain."
"When I wanted to determine what increase in weight the Nautilus
needed to be given in order to submerge, I had only to take note
of the proportionate reduction in volume that salt water experiences
in deeper and deeper strata."
"That's obvious," I replied.
"Now then, if water isn't absolutely incompressible, at least
it compresses very little. In fact, according to the most
recent calculations, this reduction is only .0000436 per atmosphere,
or per every thirty feet of depth. For instance, to go 1,000
meters down, I must take into account the reduction in volume
that occurs under a pressure equivalent to that from a 1,000-meter
column of water, in other words, under a pressure of 100 atmospheres.
In this instance the reduction would be .00436. Consequently, I'd have
to increase my weight from 1,507.2 metric tons to 1,513.77. So
the added weight would only be 6.57 metric tons."
"That's all?"
"That's all, Professor Aronnax, and the calculation is easy to check.
Now then, I have supplementary ballast tanks capable of shipping 100
metric tons of water. So I can descend to considerable depths.
When I want to rise again and lie flush with the surface, all I
have to do is expel that water; and if I desire that the Nautilus
emerge above the waves to one-tenth of its total capacity, I empty
all the ballast tanks completely."
79
This logic, backed up by figures, left me without a single objection.
"I accept your calculations, captain," I replied, "and I'd be ill-mannered
to dispute them, since your daily experience bears them out.
But at this juncture, I have a hunch that we're still left with
one real difficulty."
"What's that, sir?"
"When you're at a depth of 1,000 meters, the Nautilus's plating
bears a pressure of 100 atmospheres. If at this point you want
to empty the supplementary ballast tanks in order to lighten your
boat and rise to the surface, your pumps must overcome that pressure
of 100 atmospheres, which is 100 kilograms per each square centimeter.
This demands a strength--"
"That electricity alone can give me," Captain Nemo said swiftly.
"Sir, I repeat: the dynamic power of my engines is nearly infinite.
The Nautilus's pumps have prodigious strength, as you must
have noticed when their waterspouts swept like a torrent over
the Abraham Lincoln. Besides, I use my supplementary ballast
tanks only to reach an average depth of 1,500 to 2,000 meters,
and that with a view to conserving my machinery. Accordingly, when I
have a mind to visit the ocean depths two or three vertical leagues
beneath the surface, I use maneuvers that are more time-consuming
but no less infallible."
"What are they, captain?" I asked.
"Here I'm naturally led into telling you how the Nautilus is maneuvered."
"I can't wait to find out."
"In order to steer this boat to port or starboard, in short, to make
turns on a horizontal plane, I use an ordinary, wide-bladed rudder
that's fastened to the rear of the sternpost and worked by a wheel
and tackle. But I can also move the Nautilus upward and downward
on a vertical plane by the simple method of slanting its two fins,
which are attached to its sides at its center of flotation;
these fins are flexible, able to assume any position, and can be
operated from inside by means of powerful levers. If these fins
stay parallel with the boat, the latter moves horizontally.
If they slant, the Nautilus follows the angle of that slant and,
under its propeller's thrust, either sinks on a diagonal as steep
as it suits me, or rises on that diagonal. And similarly, if I want
to return more swiftly to the surface, I throw the propeller in gear,
and the water's pressure makes the Nautilus rise vertically, as an air
balloon inflated with hydrogen lifts swiftly into the skies."
"Bravo, captain!" I exclaimed. "But in the midst of the waters,
how can your helmsman follow the course you've given him?"
"My helmsman is stationed behind the windows of a pilothouse,
which protrudes from the topside of the Nautilus's hull and is fitted
with biconvex glass."
"Is glass capable of resisting such pressures?"
"Perfectly capable. Though fragile on impact, crystal can still
80
offer considerable resistance. In 1864, during experiments on
fishing by electric light in the middle of the North Sea, glass panes
less than seven millimeters thick were seen to resist a pressure
of sixteen atmospheres, all the while letting through strong,
heat-generating rays whose warmth was unevenly distributed.
Now then, I use glass windows measuring no less than twenty-one
centimeters at their centers; in other words, they've thirty
times the thickness."
"Fair enough, captain, but if we're going to see, we need light
to drive away the dark, and in the midst of the murky waters,
I wonder how your helmsman can--"
"Set astern of the pilothouse is a powerful electric reflector
whose rays light up the sea for a distance of half a mile."
"Oh, bravo! Bravo three times over, captain! That explains
the phosphorescent glow from this so-called narwhale that so puzzled
us scientists! Pertinent to this, I'll ask you if the Nautilus's
running afoul of the Scotia, which caused such a great uproar,
was the result of an accidental encounter?"
"Entirely accidental, sir. I was navigating two meters beneath
the surface of the water when the collision occurred. However, I could
see that it had no dire consequences."
"None, sir. But as for your encounter with the Abraham Lincoln . . . ?"
"Professor, that troubled me, because it's one of the best ships in the
gallant American navy, but they attacked me and I had to defend myself!
All the same, I was content simply to put the frigate in a condition
where it could do me no harm; it won't have any difficulty getting
repairs at the nearest port."
"Ah, commander," I exclaimed with conviction, "your Nautilus is truly
a marvelous boat!"
"Yes, professor," Captain Nemo replied with genuine excitement,
"and I love it as if it were my own flesh and blood! Aboard a
conventional ship, facing the ocean's perils, danger lurks everywhere;
on the surface of the sea, your chief sensation is the constant feeling
of an underlying chasm, as the Dutchman Jansen so aptly put it;
but below the waves aboard the Nautilus, your heart never fails you!
There are no structural deformities to worry about,
because the double hull of this boat has the rigidity of iron;
no rigging to be worn out by rolling and pitching on the waves;
no sails for the wind to carry off; no boilers for steam to burst open;
no fires to fear, because this submersible is made of sheet iron not wood;
no coal to run out of, since electricity is its mechanical force;
no collisions to fear, because it navigates the watery deep all by itself;
no storms to brave, because just a few meters beneath the waves,
it finds absolute tranquility! There, sir. There's the ideal ship!
And if it's true that the engineer has more confidence in a craft
than the builder, and the builder more than the captain himself,
you can understand the utter abandon with which I place my trust
in this Nautilus, since I'm its captain, builder, and engineer
all in one!"
Captain Nemo spoke with winning eloquence. The fire in his eyes
and the passion in his gestures transfigured him. Yes, he loved
81
his ship the same way a father loves his child!
But one question, perhaps indiscreet, naturally popped up, and I
couldn't resist asking it.
"You're an engineer, then, Captain Nemo?"
"Yes, professor," he answered me. "I studied in London, Paris,
and New York back in the days when I was a resident of
the earth's continents."
"But how were you able to build this wonderful Nautilus in secret?"
"Each part of it, Professor Aronnax, came from a different spot
on the globe and reached me at a cover address. Its keel was forged
by Creusot in France, its propeller shaft by Pen & Co. in London,
the sheet-iron plates for its hull by Laird's in Liverpool, its propeller
by Scott's in Glasgow. Its tanks were manufactured by Cail & Co.
in Paris, its engine by Krupp in Prussia, its spur by the Motala
workshops in Sweden, its precision instruments by Hart Bros.
in New York, etc.; and each of these suppliers received my
specifications under a different name."
"But," I went on, "once these parts were manufactured, didn't they
have to be mounted and adjusted?"
"Professor, I set up my workshops on a deserted islet in midocean.
There our Nautilus was completed by me and my workmen, in other words,
by my gallant companions whom I've molded and educated.
Then, when the operation was over, we burned every trace of our stay
on that islet, which if I could have, I'd have blown up."
"From all this, may I assume that such a boat costs a fortune?"
"An iron ship, Professor Aronnax, runs 1,125 francs per metric ton.
Now then, the Nautilus has a burden of 1,500 metric tons.
Consequently, it cost 1,687,000 francs, hence 2,000,000 francs
including its accommodations, and 4,000,000 or 5,000,000 with all
the collections and works of art it contains."
"One last question, Captain Nemo."
"Ask, professor."
"You're rich, then?"
"Infinitely rich, sir, and without any trouble, I could pay off
the ten-billion-franc French national debt!"
I gaped at the bizarre individual who had just spoken these words.
Was he playing on my credulity? Time would tell.
82
CHAPTER 14
The Black Current
THE PART OF THE planet earth that the seas occupy has been assessed at
3,832,558 square myriameters, hence more than 38,000,000,000 hectares.
This liquid mass totals 2,250,000,000 cubic miles and could form
a sphere with a diameter of sixty leagues, whose weight would
be three quintillion metric tons. To appreciate such a number,
we should remember that a quintillion is to a billion what a billion
is to one, in other words, there are as many billions in a quintillion
as ones in a billion! Now then, this liquid mass nearly equals
the total amount of water that has poured through all the earth's
rivers for the past 40,000 years!
During prehistoric times, an era of fire was followed by an era of water.
At first there was ocean everywhere. Then, during the Silurian period,
the tops of mountains gradually appeared above the waves,
islands emerged, disappeared beneath temporary floods, rose again,
were fused to form continents, and finally the earth's geography
settled into what we have today. Solid matter had wrested from liquid
matter some 37,657,000 square miles, hence 12,916,000,000 hectares.
The outlines of the continents allow the seas to be divided
into five major parts: the frozen Arctic and Antarctic oceans,
the Indian Ocean, the Atlantic Ocean, and the Pacific Ocean.
The Pacific Ocean extends north to south between the two polar circles
and east to west between America and Asia over an expanse of 145
degrees of longitude. It's the most tranquil of the seas; its currents
are wide and slow-moving, its tides moderate, its rainfall abundant.
And this was the ocean that I was first destined to cross under
these strangest of auspices.
"If you don't mind, professor," Captain Nemo told me, "we'll determine
our exact position and fix the starting point of our voyage.
It's fifteen minutes before noon. I'm going to rise to the surface
of the water."
The captain pressed an electric bell three times. The pumps began
to expel water from the ballast tanks; on the pressure gauge,
a needle marked the decreasing pressures that indicated the Nautilus's
upward progress; then the needle stopped.
"Here we are," the captain said.
I made my way to the central companionway, which led to the platform.
I climbed its metal steps, passed through the open hatches,
and arrived topside on the Nautilus.
The platform emerged only eighty centimeters above the waves.
The Nautilus's bow and stern boasted that spindle-shaped outline
that had caused the ship to be compared appropriately to a long cigar.
I noted the slight overlap of its sheet-iron plates, which resembled
the scales covering the bodies of our big land reptiles. So I had
a perfectly natural explanation for why, despite the best spyglasses,
83
this boat had always been mistaken for a marine animal.
Near the middle of the platform, the skiff was half set in the
ship's hull, making a slight bulge. Fore and aft stood two cupolas
of moderate height, their sides slanting and partly inset with heavy
biconvex glass, one reserved for the helmsman steering the Nautilus,
the other for the brilliance of the powerful electric beacon
lighting his way.
The sea was magnificent, the skies clear. This long aquatic
vehicle could barely feel the broad undulations of the ocean.
A mild breeze out of the east rippled the surface of the water.
Free of all mist, the horizon was ideal for taking sights.
There was nothing to be seen. Not a reef, not an islet.
No more Abraham Lincoln. A deserted immenseness.
Raising his sextant, Captain Nemo took the altitude of the sun,
which would give him his latitude. He waited for a few minutes
until the orb touched the rim of the horizon. While he was taking
his sights, he didn't move a muscle, and the instrument couldn't
have been steadier in hands made out of marble.
"Noon," he said. "Professor, whenever you're ready. . . ."
I took one last look at the sea, a little yellowish near the landing
places of Japan, and I went below again to the main lounge.
There the captain fixed his position and used a chronometer
to calculate his longitude, which he double-checked against his
previous observations of hour angles. Then he told me:
"Professor Aronnax, we're in longitude 137 degrees 15' west--"
"West of which meridian?" I asked quickly, hoping the captain's
reply might give me a clue to his nationality.
"Sir," he answered me, "I have chronometers variously set to the
meridians of Paris, Greenwich, and Washington, D.C. But in your honor,
I'll use the one for Paris."
This reply told me nothing. I bowed, and the commander went on:
"We're in longitude 137 degrees 15' west of the meridian of Paris,
and latitude 30 degrees 7' north, in other words, about 300 miles
from the shores of Japan. At noon on this day of November 8,
we hereby begin our voyage of exploration under the waters."
"May God be with us!" I replied.
"And now, professor," the captain added, "I'll leave you to your
intellectual pursuits. I've set our course east-northeast at a depth
of fifty meters. Here are some large-scale charts on which you'll
be able to follow that course. The lounge is at your disposal,
and with your permission, I'll take my leave."
Captain Nemo bowed. I was left to myself, lost in my thoughts.
They all centered on the Nautilus's commander. Would I ever learn
the nationality of this eccentric man who had boasted of having none?
His sworn hate for humanity, a hate that perhaps was bent
84
on some dreadful revenge--what had provoked it? Was he one of
those unappreciated scholars, one of those geniuses "embittered
by the world," as Conseil expressed it, a latter-day Galileo,
or maybe one of those men of science, like America's Commander Maury,
whose careers were ruined by political revolutions? I couldn't say yet.
As for me, whom fate had just brought aboard his vessel,
whose life he had held in the balance: he had received me coolly
but hospitably. Only, he never took the hand I extended to him.
He never extended his own.
For an entire hour I was deep in these musings, trying to probe this
mystery that fascinated me so. Then my eyes focused on a huge world
map displayed on the table, and I put my finger on the very spot
where our just-determined longitude and latitude intersected.
Like the continents, the sea has its rivers. These are exclusive
currents that can be identified by their temperature and color,
the most remarkable being the one called the Gulf Stream.
Science has defined the global paths of five chief currents:
one in the north Atlantic, a second in the south Atlantic,
a third in the north Pacific, a fourth in the south Pacific,
and a fifth in the southern Indian Ocean. Also it's likely
that a sixth current used to exist in the northern Indian Ocean,
when the Caspian and Aral Seas joined up with certain large Asian
lakes to form a single uniform expanse of water.
Now then, at the spot indicated on the world map, one of these seagoing
rivers was rolling by, the Kuroshio of the Japanese, the Black Current:
heated by perpendicular rays from the tropical sun, it leaves the Bay
of Bengal, crosses the Strait of Malacca, goes up the shores of Asia,
and curves into the north Pacific as far as the Aleutian Islands,
carrying along trunks of camphor trees and other local items, the pure
indigo of its warm waters sharply contrasting with the ocean's waves.
It was this current the Nautilus was about to cross.
I watched it on the map with my eyes, I saw it lose itself in the
immenseness of the Pacific, and I felt myself swept along with it,
when Ned Land and Conseil appeared in the lounge doorway.
My two gallant companions stood petrified at the sight of the
wonders on display.
"Where are we?" the Canadian exclaimed. "In the Quebec Museum?"
"Begging master's pardon," Conseil answered, "but this seems more
like the Sommerard artifacts exhibition!"
"My friends," I replied, signaling them to enter, "you're in neither
Canada nor France, but securely aboard the Nautilus, fifty meters
below sea level."
"If master says so, then so be it," Conseil answered.
"But in all honesty, this lounge is enough to astonish even someone
Flemish like myself."
"Indulge your astonishment, my friend, and have a look, because there's
plenty of work here for a classifier of your talents."
Conseil needed no encouraging. Bending over the glass cases,
the gallant lad was already muttering choice words from the
naturalist's vocabulary: class Gastropoda, family Buccinoidea,
85
genus cowry, species Cypraea madagascariensis, etc.
Meanwhile Ned Land, less dedicated to conchology, questioned me
about my interview with Captain Nemo. Had I discovered who he was,
where he came from, where he was heading, how deep he was taking us?
In short, a thousand questions I had no time to answer.
I told him everything I knew--or, rather, everything I didn't know--
and I asked him what he had seen or heard on his part.
"Haven't seen or heard a thing!" the Canadian replied.
"I haven't even spotted the crew of this boat. By any chance,
could they be electric too?"
"Electric?"
"Oh ye gods, I'm half tempted to believe it! But back to you,
Professor Aronnax," Ned Land said, still hanging on to his ideas.
"Can't you tell me how many men are on board? Ten, twenty,
fifty, a hundred?"
"I'm unable to answer you, Mr. Land. And trust me on this:
for the time being, get rid of these notions of taking over
the Nautilus or escaping from it. This boat is a masterpiece
of modern technology, and I'd be sorry to have missed it!
Many people would welcome the circumstances that have been handed us,
just to walk in the midst of these wonders. So keep calm,
and let's see what's happening around us."
"See!" the harpooner exclaimed. "There's nothing to see,
nothing we'll ever see from this sheet-iron prison! We're simply
running around blindfolded--"
Ned Land was just pronouncing these last words when we were
suddenly plunged into darkness, utter darkness. The ceiling lights
went out so quickly, my eyes literally ached, just as if we had
experienced the opposite sensation of going from the deepest gloom
to the brightest sunlight.
We stood stock-still, not knowing what surprise was waiting for us,
whether pleasant or unpleasant. But a sliding sound became audible.
You could tell that some panels were shifting over the Nautilus's sides.
"It's the beginning of the end!" Ned Land said.
". . . order Hydromedusa," Conseil muttered.
Suddenly, through two oblong openings, daylight appeared on both
sides of the lounge. The liquid masses came into view, brightly lit
by the ship's electric outpourings. We were separated from the sea
by two panes of glass. Initially I shuddered at the thought
that these fragile partitions could break; but strong copper bands
secured them, giving them nearly infinite resistance.
The sea was clearly visible for a one-mile radius around
the Nautilus. What a sight! What pen could describe it?
Who could portray the effects of this light through these translucent
sheets of water, the subtlety of its progressive shadings into
the ocean's upper and lower strata?
86
The transparency of salt water has long been recognized.
Its clarity is believed to exceed that of spring water.
The mineral and organic substances it holds in suspension actually
increase its translucency. In certain parts of the Caribbean Sea,
you can see the sandy bottom with startling distinctness as deep
as 145 meters down, and the penetrating power of the sun's
rays seems to give out only at a depth of 300 meters.
But in this fluid setting traveled by the Nautilus, our electric
glow was being generated in the very heart of the waves.
It was no longer illuminated water, it was liquid light.
If we accept the hypotheses of the microbiologist Ehrenberg--
who believes that these underwater depths are lit up by
phosphorescent organisms--nature has certainly saved one of her
most prodigious sights for residents of the sea, and I could
judge for myself from the thousandfold play of the light.
On both sides I had windows opening over these unexplored depths.
The darkness in the lounge enhanced the brightness outside, and we
stared as if this clear glass were the window of an immense aquarium.
The Nautilus seemed to be standing still. This was due to the lack
of landmarks. But streaks of water, parted by the ship's spur,
sometimes threaded before our eyes with extraordinary speed.
In wonderment, we leaned on our elbows before these show windows,
and our stunned silence remained unbroken until Conseil said:
"You wanted to see something, Ned my friend; well, now you have
something to see!"
"How unusual!" the Canadian put in, setting aside his tantrums
and getaway schemes while submitting to this irresistible allure.
"A man would go an even greater distance just to stare at such a sight!"
"Ah!" I exclaimed. "I see our captain's way of life!
He's found himself a separate world that saves its most astonishing
wonders just for him!"
"But where are the fish?" the Canadian ventured to observe.
"I don't see any fish!"
"Why would you care, Ned my friend?" Conseil replied.
"Since you have no knowledge of them."
"Me? A fisherman!" Ned Land exclaimed.
And on this subject a dispute arose between the two friends, since both
were knowledgeable about fish, but from totally different standpoints.
Everyone knows that fish make up the fourth and last class in
the vertebrate branch. They have been quite aptly defined as:
"cold-blooded vertebrates with a double circulatory system,
breathing through gills, and designed to live in water."
They consist of two distinct series: the series of bony fish,
in other words, those whose spines have vertebrae made of bone;
and cartilaginous fish, in other words, those whose spines have
vertebrae made of cartilage.
Possibly the Canadian was familiar with this distinction, but Conseil
knew far more about it; and since he and Ned were now fast friends,
87
he just had to show off. So he told the harpooner:
"Ned my friend, you're a slayer of fish, a highly skilled fisherman.
You've caught a large number of these fascinating animals.
But I'll bet you don't know how they're classified."
"Sure I do," the harpooner replied in all seriousness.
"They're classified into fish we eat and fish we don't eat!"
"Spoken like a true glutton," Conseil replied. "But tell me,
are you familiar with the differences between bony fish
and cartilaginous fish?"
"Just maybe, Conseil."
"And how about the subdivisions of these two large classes?"
"I haven't the foggiest notion," the Canadian replied.
"All right, listen and learn, Ned my friend! Bony fish are subdivided
into six orders. Primo, the acanthopterygians, whose upper jaw is fully
formed and free-moving, and whose gills take the shape of a comb.
This order consists of fifteen families, in other words,
three-quarters of all known fish. Example: the common perch."
"Pretty fair eating," Ned Land replied.
"Secundo," Conseil went on, "the abdominals, whose pelvic fins hang
under the abdomen to the rear of the pectorals but aren't attached to
the shoulder bone, an order that's divided into five families and makes
up the great majority of freshwater fish. Examples: carp, pike."
"Ugh!" the Canadian put in with distinct scorn. "You can keep
the freshwater fish!"
"Tertio," Conseil said, "the subbrachians, whose pelvic fins are
attached under the pectorals and hang directly from the shoulder bone.
This order contains four families. Examples: flatfish such
as sole, turbot, dab, plaice, brill, etc."
"Excellent, really excellent!" the harpooner exclaimed, interested in
fish only from an edible viewpoint.
"Quarto," Conseil went on, unabashed, "the apods, with long bodies
that lack pelvic fins and are covered by a heavy, often glutinous skin,
an order consisting of only one family. Examples: common eels
and electric eels."
"So-so, just so-so!" Ned Land replied.
"Quinto," Conseil said, "the lophobranchians, which have fully formed,
free-moving jaws but whose gills consist of little tufts arranged
in pairs along their gill arches. This order includes only
one family. Examples: seahorses and dragonfish."
"Bad, very bad!" the harpooner replied.
"Sexto and last," Conseil said, "the plectognaths, whose maxillary
bone is firmly attached to the side of the intermaxillary that forms
the jaw, and whose palate arch is locked to the skull by sutures
88
that render the jaw immovable, an order lacking true pelvic fins
and which consists of two families. Examples: puffers and moonfish."
"They're an insult to a frying pan!" the Canadian exclaimed.
"Are you grasping all this, Ned my friend?" asked the scholarly Conseil.
"Not a lick of it, Conseil my friend," the harpooner replied.
"But keep going, because you fill me with fascination."
"As for cartilaginous fish," Conseil went on unflappably,
"they consist of only three orders."
"Good news," Ned put in.
"Primo, the cyclostomes, whose jaws are fused into a flexible
ring and whose gill openings are simply a large number of holes,
an order consisting of only one family. Example: the lamprey."
"An acquired taste," Ned Land replied.
"Secundo, the selacians, with gills resembling those of the cyclostomes
but whose lower jaw is free-moving. This order, which is the most
important in the class, consists of two families. Examples: the ray
and the shark."
"What!" Ned Land exclaimed. "Rays and man-eaters in the same order?
Well, Conseil my friend, on behalf of the rays, I wouldn't advise
you to put them in the same fish tank!"
"Tertio," Conseil replied, "The sturionians, whose gill opening is
the usual single slit adorned with a gill cover, an order consisting
of four genera. Example: the sturgeon."
"Ah, Conseil my friend, you saved the best for last, in my
opinion anyhow! And that's all of 'em?"
"Yes, my gallant Ned," Conseil replied. "And note well, even when one
has grasped all this, one still knows next to nothing, because these
families are subdivided into genera, subgenera, species, varieties--"
"All right, Conseil my friend," the harpooner said, leaning toward
the glass panel, "here come a couple of your varieties now!"
"Yes! Fish!" Conseil exclaimed. "One would think he was in front
of an aquarium!"
"No," I replied, "because an aquarium is nothing more than a cage,
and these fish are as free as birds in the air!"
"Well, Conseil my friend, identify them! Start naming them!"
Ned Land exclaimed.
"Me?" Conseil replied. "I'm unable to! That's my employer's bailiwick!"
And in truth, although the fine lad was a classifying maniac, he was
no naturalist, and I doubt that he could tell a bonito from a tuna.
In short, he was the exact opposite of the Canadian, who knew nothing
about classification but could instantly put a name to any fish.
89
"A triggerfish," I said.
"It's a Chinese triggerfish," Ned Land replied.
"Genus Balistes, family Scleroderma, order Plectognatha,"
Conseil muttered.
Assuredly, Ned and Conseil in combination added up to
one outstanding naturalist.
The Canadian was not mistaken. Cavorting around the Nautilus
was a school of triggerfish with flat bodies, grainy skins,
armed with stings on their dorsal fins, and with four prickly
rows of quills quivering on both sides of their tails.
Nothing could have been more wonderful than the skin covering them:
white underneath, gray above, with spots of gold sparkling in
the dark eddies of the waves. Around them, rays were undulating
like sheets flapping in the wind, and among these I spotted,
much to my glee, a Chinese ray, yellowish on its topside, a dainty
pink on its belly, and armed with three stings behind its eyes;
a rare species whose very existence was still doubted in Lacépède's day,
since that pioneering classifier of fish had seen one only in a
portfolio of Japanese drawings.
For two hours a whole aquatic army escorted the Nautilus. In the midst
of their leaping and cavorting, while they competed with each other
in beauty, radiance, and speed, I could distinguish some green wrasse,
bewhiskered mullet marked with pairs of black lines, white gobies from
the genus Eleotris with curved caudal fins and violet spots on the back,
wonderful Japanese mackerel from the genus Scomber with blue bodies
and silver heads, glittering azure goldfish whose name by itself
gives their full description, several varieties of porgy or gilthead
(some banded gilthead with fins variously blue and yellow,
some with horizontal heraldic bars and enhanced by a black strip
around their caudal area, some with color zones and elegantly corseted
in their six waistbands), trumpetfish with flutelike beaks that looked
like genuine seafaring woodcocks and were sometimes a meter long,
Japanese salamanders, serpentine moray eels from the genus Echidna
that were six feet long with sharp little eyes and a huge mouth
bristling with teeth; etc.
Our wonderment stayed at an all-time fever pitch.
Our exclamations were endless. Ned identified the fish,
Conseil classified them, and as for me, I was in ecstasy over
the verve of their movements and the beauty of their forms.
Never before had I been given the chance to glimpse these animals
alive and at large in their native element.
Given such a complete collection from the seas of Japan and China, I
won't mention every variety that passed before our dazzled eyes.
More numerous than birds in the air, these fish raced right up to us,
no doubt attracted by the brilliant glow of our electric beacon.
Suddenly daylight appeared in the lounge. The sheet-iron panels
slid shut. The magical vision disappeared. But for a good
while I kept dreaming away, until the moment my eyes focused on
the instruments hanging on the wall. The compass still showed our
heading as east-northeast, the pressure gauge indicated a pressure
of five atmospheres (corresponding to a depth of fifty meters),
and the electric log gave our speed as fifteen miles per hour.
90
I waited for Captain Nemo. But he didn't appear. The clock marked
the hour of five.
Ned Land and Conseil returned to their cabin. As for me,
I repaired to my stateroom. There I found dinner ready for me.
It consisted of turtle soup made from the daintiest hawksbill,
a red mullet with white, slightly flaky flesh, whose liver,
when separately prepared, makes delicious eating, plus loin of
imperial angelfish, whose flavor struck me as even better than salmon.
I spent the evening in reading, writing, and thinking.
Then drowsiness overtook me, I stretched out on my eelgrass mattress,
and I fell into a deep slumber, while the Nautilus glided through
the swiftly flowing Black Current.
91
CHAPTER 15
An Invitation in Writing
THE NEXT DAY, November 9, I woke up only after a long,
twelve-hour slumber. Conseil, a creature of habit, came to
ask "how master's night went," and to offer his services.
He had left his Canadian friend sleeping like a man who had never
done anything else.
I let the gallant lad babble as he pleased, without giving him
much in the way of a reply. I was concerned about Captain Nemo's
absence during our session the previous afternoon, and I hoped
to see him again today.
Soon I had put on my clothes, which were woven from strands of
seashell tissue. More than once their composition provoked comments
from Conseil. I informed him that they were made from the smooth,
silken filaments with which the fan mussel, a type of seashell quite
abundant along Mediterranean beaches, attaches itself to rocks.
In olden times, fine fabrics, stockings, and gloves were made from
such filaments, because they were both very soft and very warm.
So the Nautilus's crew could dress themselves at little cost,
without needing a thing from cotton growers, sheep, or silkworms on shore.
As soon as I was dressed, I made my way to the main lounge.
It was deserted.
I dove into studying the conchological treasures amassed inside
the glass cases. I also investigated the huge plant albums that
were filled with the rarest marine herbs, which, although they
were pressed and dried, still kept their wonderful colors.
Among these valuable water plants, I noted various seaweed:
some Cladostephus verticillatus, peacock's tails, fig-leafed caulerpa,
grain-bearing beauty bushes, delicate rosetangle tinted scarlet,
sea colander arranged into fan shapes, mermaid's cups that looked
like the caps of squat mushrooms and for years had been classified
among the zoophytes; in short, a complete series of algae.
The entire day passed without my being honored by a visit
from Captain Nemo. The panels in the lounge didn't open.
Perhaps they didn't want us to get tired of these beautiful things.
The Nautilus kept to an east-northeasterly heading, a speed of twelve
miles per hour, and a depth between fifty and sixty meters.
Next day, November 10: the same neglect, the same solitude.
I didn't see a soul from the crew. Ned and Conseil spent
the better part of the day with me. They were astonished at
the captain's inexplicable absence. Was this eccentric man ill?
Did he want to change his plans concerning us?
But after all, as Conseil noted, we enjoyed complete freedom,
we were daintily and abundantly fed. Our host had kept to the terms
of his agreement. We couldn't complain, and moreover the very
uniqueness of our situation had such generous rewards in store for us,
92
we had no grounds for criticism.
That day I started my diary of these adventures, which has enabled me
to narrate them with the most scrupulous accuracy; and one odd detail:
I wrote it on paper manufactured from marine eelgrass.
Early in the morning on November 11, fresh air poured through
the Nautilus's interior, informing me that we had returned
to the surface of the ocean to renew our oxygen supply.
I headed for the central companionway and climbed onto the platform.
It was six o'clock. I found the weather overcast, the sea gray but calm.
Hardly a billow. I hoped to encounter Captain Nemo there--would he come?
I saw only the helmsman imprisoned in his glass-windowed pilothouse.
Seated on the ledge furnished by the hull of the skiff, I inhaled
the sea's salty aroma with great pleasure.
Little by little, the mists were dispersed under the action
of the sun's rays. The radiant orb cleared the eastern horizon.
Under its gaze, the sea caught on fire like a trail of gunpowder.
Scattered on high, the clouds were colored in bright, wonderfully
shaded hues, and numerous "ladyfingers" warned of daylong winds.*
*Author's Note: "Ladyfingers" are small, thin, white clouds
with ragged edges.
But what were mere winds to this Nautilus, which no storms
could intimidate!
So I was marveling at this delightful sunrise, so life-giving
and cheerful, when I heard someone climbing onto the platform.
I was prepared to greet Captain Nemo, but it was his chief
officer who appeared--whom I had already met during our first
visit with the captain. He advanced over the platform,
not seeming to notice my presence. A powerful spyglass to his eye,
he scrutinized every point of the horizon with the utmost care.
Then, his examination over, he approached the hatch and pronounced
a phrase whose exact wording follows below. I remember it because,
every morning, it was repeated under the same circumstances.
It ran like this:
"Nautron respoc lorni virch."
What it meant I was unable to say.
These words pronounced, the chief officer went below again.
I thought the Nautilus was about to resume its underwater navigating.
So I went down the hatch and back through the gangways to my stateroom.
Five days passed in this way with no change in our situation.
Every morning I climbed onto the platform. The same phrase was
pronounced by the same individual. Captain Nemo did not appear.
I was pursuing the policy that we had seen the last of him,
when on November 16, while reentering my stateroom with Ned
and Conseil, I found a note addressed to me on the table.
I opened it impatiently. It was written in a script that was clear
and neat but a bit "Old English" in style, its characters reminding
93
me of German calligraphy.
The note was worded as follows:
Professor Aronnax
Aboard the Nautilus
November 16, 1867
Captain Nemo invites Professor Aronnax on a hunting trip that
will take place tomorrow morning in his Crespo Island forests.
He hopes nothing will prevent the professor from attending, and he looks
forward with pleasure to the professor's companions joining him.
CAPTAIN NEMO,
Commander of the Nautilus.
"A hunting trip!" Ned exclaimed.
"And in his forests on Crespo Island!" Conseil added.
"But does this mean the old boy goes ashore?" Ned Land went on.
"That seems to be the gist of it," I said, rereading the letter.
"Well, we've got to accept!" the Canadian answered.
"Once we're on solid ground, we'll figure out a course of action.
Besides, it wouldn't pain me to eat a couple slices of fresh venison!"
Without trying to reconcile the contradictions between Captain Nemo's
professed horror of continents or islands and his invitation to go
hunting in a forest, I was content to reply:
"First let's look into this Crespo Island."
I consulted the world map; and in latitude 32 degrees 40'
north and longitude 167 degrees 50' west, I found an islet that had
been discovered in 1801 by Captain Crespo, which old Spanish charts
called Rocca de la Plata, in other words, "Silver Rock." So we were
about 1,800 miles from our starting point, and by a slight change
of heading, the Nautilus was bringing us back toward the southeast.
I showed my companions this small, stray rock in the middle
of the north Pacific.
"If Captain Nemo does sometimes go ashore," I told them, "at least
he only picks desert islands!"
Ned Land shook his head without replying; then he and Conseil left me.
After supper was served me by the mute and emotionless steward,
I fell asleep; but not without some anxieties.
94
When I woke up the next day, November 17, I sensed that the Nautilus
was completely motionless. I dressed hurriedly and entered
the main lounge.
Captain Nemo was there waiting for me. He stood up, bowed, and asked
if it suited me to come along.
Since he made no allusion to his absence the past eight days,
I also refrained from mentioning it, and I simply answered that my
companions and I were ready to go with him.
"Only, sir," I added, "I'll take the liberty of addressing
a question to you."
"Address away, Professor Aronnax, and if I'm able to answer, I will."
"Well then, captain, how is it that you've severed all ties with
the shore, yet you own forests on Crespo Island?"
"Professor," the captain answered me, "these forests of mine
don't bask in the heat and light of the sun. They aren't
frequented by lions, tigers, panthers, or other quadrupeds.
They're known only to me. They grow only for me. These forests
aren't on land, they're actual underwater forests."
"Underwater forests!" I exclaimed.
"Yes, professor."
"And you're offering to take me to them?"
"Precisely."
"On foot?"
"Without getting your feet wet."
"While hunting?"
"While hunting."
"Rifles in hand?"
"Rifles in hand."
I stared at the Nautilus's commander with an air anything but
flattering to the man.
"Assuredly," I said to myself, "he's contracted some mental illness.
He's had a fit that's lasted eight days and isn't over even yet.
What a shame! I liked him better eccentric than insane!"
These thoughts were clearly readable on my face; but Captain Nemo
remained content with inviting me to follow him, and I did so like
a man resigned to the worst.
We arrived at the dining room, where we found breakfast served.
"Professor Aronnax," the captain told me, "I beg you to share
my breakfast without formality. We can chat while we eat.
95
Because, although I promised you a stroll in my forests, I made
no pledge to arrange for your encountering a restaurant there.
Accordingly, eat your breakfast like a man who'll probably eat
dinner only when it's extremely late."
I did justice to this meal. It was made up of various fish
and some slices of sea cucumber, that praiseworthy zoophyte,
all garnished with such highly appetizing seaweed as the Porphyra
laciniata and the Laurencia primafetida. Our beverage consisted
of clear water to which, following the captain's example, I added
some drops of a fermented liquor extracted by the Kamchatka process
from the seaweed known by name as Rhodymenia palmata.
At first Captain Nemo ate without pronouncing a single word.
Then he told me:
"Professor, when I proposed that you go hunting in my Crespo forests,
you thought I was contradicting myself. When I informed you that it
was an issue of underwater forests, you thought I'd gone insane.
Professor, you must never make snap judgments about your fellow man."
"But, captain, believe me--"
"Kindly listen to me, and you'll see if you have grounds for accusing
me of insanity or self-contradiction."
"I'm all attention."
"Professor, you know as well as I do that a man can live underwater
so long as he carries with him his own supply of breathable air.
For underwater work projects, the workman wears a waterproof suit
with his head imprisoned in a metal capsule, while he receives air
from above by means of force pumps and flow regulators."
"That's the standard equipment for a diving suit," I said.
"Correct, but under such conditions the man has no freedom.
He's attached to a pump that sends him air through an india-rubber hose;
it's an actual chain that fetters him to the shore, and if we were
to be bound in this way to the Nautilus, we couldn't go far either."
"Then how do you break free?" I asked.
"We use the Rouquayrol-Denayrouze device, invented by two of your
fellow countrymen but refined by me for my own special uses,
thereby enabling you to risk these new physiological conditions
without suffering any organic disorders. It consists of a tank
built from heavy sheet iron in which I store air under a pressure
of fifty atmospheres. This tank is fastened to the back by means
of straps, like a soldier's knapsack. Its top part forms a box
where the air is regulated by a bellows mechanism and can be
released only at its proper tension. In the Rouquayrol device
that has been in general use, two india-rubber hoses leave this
box and feed to a kind of tent that imprisons the operator's nose
and mouth; one hose is for the entrance of air to be inhaled,
the other for the exit of air to be exhaled, and the tongue closes
off the former or the latter depending on the breather's needs.
But in my case, since I face considerable pressures at the bottom
of the sea, I needed to enclose my head in a copper sphere,
like those found on standard diving suits, and the two hoses
96
for inhalation and exhalation now feed to that sphere."
"That's perfect, Captain Nemo, but the air you carry must be
quickly depleted; and once it contains no more than 15% oxygen,
it becomes unfit for breathing."
"Surely, but as I told you, Professor Aronnax, the Nautilus's
pumps enable me to store air under considerable pressure,
and given this circumstance, the tank on my diving equipment can
supply breathable air for nine or ten hours."
"I've no more objections to raise," I replied. "I'll only
ask you, captain: how can you light your way at the bottom
of the ocean?"
"With the Ruhmkorff device, Professor Aronnax. If the first
is carried on the back, the second is fastened to the belt.
It consists of a Bunsen battery that I activate not with potassium
dichromate but with sodium. An induction coil gathers the electricity
generated and directs it to a specially designed lantern.
In this lantern one finds a glass spiral that contains only
a residue of carbon dioxide gas. When the device is operating,
this gas becomes luminous and gives off a continuous whitish light.
Thus provided for, I breathe and I see."
"Captain Nemo, to my every objection you give such crushing answers,
I'm afraid to entertain a single doubt. However, though I have no
choice but to accept both the Rouquayrol and Ruhmkorff devices,
I'd like to register some reservations about the rifle with which
you'll equip me."
"But it isn't a rifle that uses gunpowder," the captain replied.
"Then it's an air gun?"
"Surely. How can I make gunpowder on my ship when I have no saltpeter,
sulfur, or charcoal?"
"Even so," I replied, "to fire underwater in a medium that's 855 times
denser than air, you'd have to overcome considerable resistance."
"That doesn't necessarily follow. There are certain Fulton-style
guns perfected by the Englishmen Philippe-Coles and Burley,
the Frenchman Furcy, and the Italian Landi; they're equipped
with a special system of airtight fastenings and can fire
in underwater conditions. But I repeat: having no gunpowder,
I've replaced it with air at high pressure, which is abundantly
supplied me by the Nautilus's pumps."
"But this air must be swiftly depleted."
"Well, in a pinch can't my Rouquayrol tank supply me with more? All I
have to do is draw it from an ad hoc spigot.* Besides, Professor Aronnax,
you'll see for yourself that during these underwater hunting trips,
we make no great expenditure of either air or bullets."
*Latin: a spigot "just for that purpose." Ed.
"But it seems to me that in this semidarkness, amid this liquid
that's so dense in comparison to the atmosphere, a gunshot couldn't
97
carry far and would prove fatal only with difficulty!"
"On the contrary, sir, with this rifle every shot is fatal;
and as soon as the animal is hit, no matter how lightly, it falls
as if struck by lightning."
"Why?"
"Because this rifle doesn't shoot ordinary bullets but little
glass capsules invented by the Austrian chemist Leniebroek,
and I have a considerable supply of them. These glass capsules
are covered with a strip of steel and weighted with a lead base;
they're genuine little Leyden jars charged with high-voltage electricity.
They go off at the slightest impact, and the animal, no matter
how strong, drops dead. I might add that these capsules are no
bigger than number 4 shot, and the chamber of any ordinary rifle
could hold ten of them."
"I'll quit debating," I replied, getting up from the table.
"And all that's left is for me to shoulder my rifle.
So where you go, I'll go."
Captain Nemo led me to the Nautilus's stern, and passing
by Ned and Conseil's cabin, I summoned my two companions,
who instantly followed us.
Then we arrived at a cell located within easy access of the engine room;
in this cell we were to get dressed for our stroll.
98
CHAPTER 16
Strolling the Plains
THIS CELL, properly speaking, was the Nautilus's arsenal and wardrobe.
Hanging from its walls, a dozen diving outfits were waiting for
anybody who wanted to take a stroll.
After seeing these, Ned Land exhibited an obvious distaste for the idea
of putting one on.
"But my gallant Ned," I told him, "the forests of Crespo Island
are simply underwater forests!"
"Oh great!" put in the disappointed harpooner, watching his dreams
of fresh meat fade away. "And you, Professor Aronnax, are you
going to stick yourself inside these clothes?"
"It has to be, Mr. Ned."
"Have it your way, sir," the harpooner replied, shrugging his shoulders.
"But speaking for myself, I'll never get into those things unless
they force me!"
"No one will force you, Mr. Land," Captain Nemo said.
"And is Conseil going to risk it?" Ned asked.
"Where master goes, I go," Conseil replied.
At the captain's summons, two crewmen came to help us put
on these heavy, waterproof clothes, made from seamless india
rubber and expressly designed to bear considerable pressures.
They were like suits of armor that were both yielding and resistant,
you might say. These clothes consisted of jacket and pants.
The pants ended in bulky footwear adorned with heavy lead soles.
The fabric of the jacket was reinforced with copper mail that shielded
the chest, protected it from the water's pressure, and allowed
the lungs to function freely; the sleeves ended in supple gloves
that didn't impede hand movements.
These perfected diving suits, it was easy to see, were a far cry from
such misshapen costumes as the cork breastplates, leather jumpers,
seagoing tunics, barrel helmets, etc., invented and acclaimed
in the 18th century.
Conseil and I were soon dressed in these diving suits, as were
Captain Nemo and one of his companions--a herculean type who must
have been prodigiously strong. All that remained was to encase one's
head in its metal sphere. But before proceeding with this operation,
I asked the captain for permission to examine the rifles set
aside for us.
One of the Nautilus's men presented me with a streamlined rifle
whose butt was boilerplate steel, hollow inside, and of fairly
large dimensions. This served as a tank for the compressed air,
99
which a trigger-operated valve could release into the metal chamber.
In a groove where the butt was heaviest, a cartridge clip
held some twenty electric bullets that, by means of a spring,
automatically took their places in the barrel of the rifle.
As soon as one shot had been fired, another was ready to go off.
"Captain Nemo," I said, "this is an ideal, easy-to-use weapon.
I ask only to put it to the test. But how will we reach the bottom
of the sea?"
"Right now, professor, the Nautilus is aground in ten meters of water,
and we've only to depart."
"But how will we set out?"
"You'll see."
Captain Nemo inserted his cranium into its spherical headgear.
Conseil and I did the same, but not without hearing the Canadian
toss us a sarcastic "happy hunting." On top, the suit ended in a
collar of threaded copper onto which the metal helmet was screwed.
Three holes, protected by heavy glass, allowed us to see in any
direction with simply a turn of the head inside the sphere.
Placed on our backs, the Rouquayrol device went into operation as soon
as it was in position, and for my part, I could breathe with ease.
The Ruhmkorff lamp hanging from my belt, my rifle in hand,
I was ready to go forth. But in all honesty, while imprisoned
in these heavy clothes and nailed to the deck by my lead soles,
it was impossible for me to take a single step.
But this circumstance had been foreseen, because I felt
myself propelled into a little room adjoining the wardrobe.
Towed in the same way, my companions went with me. I heard a door
with watertight seals close after us, and we were surrounded
by profound darkness.
After some minutes a sharp hissing reached my ears.
I felt a distinct sensation of cold rising from my feet to my chest.
Apparently a stopcock inside the boat was letting in water
from outside, which overran us and soon filled up the room.
Contrived in the Nautilus's side, a second door then opened.
We were lit by a subdued light. An instant later our feet were
treading the bottom of the sea.
And now, how can I convey the impressions left on me by this stroll
under the waters. Words are powerless to describe such wonders!
When even the painter's brush can't depict the effects unique to
the liquid element, how can the writer's pen hope to reproduce them?
Captain Nemo walked in front, and his companion followed us a few steps
to the rear. Conseil and I stayed next to each other, as if daydreaming
that through our metal carapaces, a little polite conversation
might still be possible! Already I no longer felt the bulkiness
of my clothes, footwear, and air tank, nor the weight of the heavy
sphere inside which my head was rattling like an almond in its shell.
Once immersed in water, all these objects lost a part of their
100
weight equal to the weight of the liquid they displaced, and thanks
to this law of physics discovered by Archimedes, I did just fine.
I was no longer an inert mass, and I had, comparatively speaking,
great freedom of movement.
Lighting up the seafloor even thirty feet beneath the surface
of the ocean, the sun astonished me with its power. The solar rays
easily crossed this aqueous mass and dispersed its dark colors.
I could easily distinguish objects 100 meters away. Farther on,
the bottom was tinted with fine shades of ultramarine; then, off in
the distance, it turned blue and faded in the midst of a hazy darkness.
Truly, this water surrounding me was just a kind of air,
denser than the atmosphere on land but almost as transparent.
Above me I could see the calm surface of the ocean.
We were walking on sand that was fine-grained and smooth,
not wrinkled like beach sand, which preserves the impressions
left by the waves. This dazzling carpet was a real mirror,
throwing back the sun's rays with startling intensity. The outcome:
an immense vista of reflections that penetrated every liquid molecule.
Will anyone believe me if I assert that at this thirty-foot depth,
I could see as if it was broad daylight?
For a quarter of an hour, I trod this blazing sand, which was
strewn with tiny crumbs of seashell. Looming like a long reef,
the Nautilus's hull disappeared little by little, but when night fell
in the midst of the waters, the ship's beacon would surely facilitate
our return on board, since its rays carried with perfect distinctness.
This effect is difficult to understand for anyone who has never
seen light beams so sharply defined on shore. There the dust that
saturates the air gives such rays the appearance of a luminous fog;
but above water as well as underwater, shafts of electric light
are transmitted with incomparable clarity.
Meanwhile we went ever onward, and these vast plains of sand
seemed endless. My hands parted liquid curtains that closed again
behind me, and my footprints faded swiftly under the water's pressure.
Soon, scarcely blurred by their distance from us, the forms of some
objects took shape before my eyes. I recognized the lower slopes
of some magnificent rocks carpeted by the finest zoophyte specimens,
and right off, I was struck by an effect unique to this medium.
By then it was ten o'clock in the morning. The sun's rays hit
the surface of the waves at a fairly oblique angle, decomposing by
refraction as though passing through a prism; and when this light came
in contact with flowers, rocks, buds, seashells, and polyps, the edges
of these objects were shaded with all seven hues of the solar spectrum.
This riot of rainbow tints was a wonder, a feast for the eyes:
a genuine kaleidoscope of red, green, yellow, orange, violet, indigo,
and blue; in short, the whole palette of a color-happy painter!
If only I had been able to share with Conseil the intense sensations
rising in my brain, competing with him in exclamations of wonderment!
If only I had known, like Captain Nemo and his companion,
how to exchange thoughts by means of prearranged signals!
So, for lack of anything better, I talked to myself: I declaimed
inside this copper box that topped my head, spending more air
on empty words than was perhaps advisable.
Conseil, like me, had stopped before this splendid sight.
101
Obviously, in the presence of these zoophyte and mollusk specimens,
the fine lad was classifying his head off. Polyps and echinoderms
abounded on the seafloor: various isis coral, cornularian coral
living in isolation, tufts of virginal genus Oculina formerly
known by the name "white coral," prickly fungus coral in the shape
of mushrooms, sea anemone holding on by their muscular disks,
providing a literal flowerbed adorned by jellyfish from the genus
Porpita wearing collars of azure tentacles, and starfish that spangled
the sand, including veinlike feather stars from the genus Asterophyton
that were like fine lace embroidered by the hands of water nymphs,
their festoons swaying to the faint undulations caused by our walking.
It filled me with real chagrin to crush underfoot the gleaming
mollusk samples that littered the seafloor by the thousands:
concentric comb shells, hammer shells, coquina (seashells that actually
hop around), top-shell snails, red helmet shells, angel-wing conchs,
sea hares, and so many other exhibits from this inexhaustible ocean.
But we had to keep walking, and we went forward while overhead there
scudded schools of Portuguese men-of-war that let their ultramarine
tentacles drift in their wakes, medusas whose milky white or dainty
pink parasols were festooned with azure tassels and shaded us from
the sun's rays, plus jellyfish of the species Pelagia panopyra that,
in the dark, would have strewn our path with phosphorescent glimmers!
All these wonders I glimpsed in the space of a quarter of a mile,
barely pausing, following Captain Nemo whose gestures kept beckoning
me onward. Soon the nature of the seafloor changed. The plains of sand
were followed by a bed of that viscous slime Americans call "ooze,"
which is composed exclusively of seashells rich in limestone or silica.
Then we crossed a prairie of algae, open-sea plants that the waters
hadn't yet torn loose, whose vegetation grew in wild profusion.
Soft to the foot, these densely textured lawns would have
rivaled the most luxuriant carpets woven by the hand of man.
But while this greenery was sprawling under our steps, it didn't
neglect us overhead. The surface of the water was crisscrossed
by a floating arbor of marine plants belonging to that superabundant
algae family that numbers more than 2,000 known species.
I saw long ribbons of fucus drifting above me, some globular,
others tubular: Laurencia, Cladostephus with the slenderest foliage,
Rhodymenia palmata resembling the fan shapes of cactus.
I observed that green-colored plants kept closer to the surface
of the sea, while reds occupied a medium depth, which left
blacks and browns in charge of designing gardens and flowerbeds
in the ocean's lower strata.
These algae are a genuine prodigy of creation, one of the wonders
of world flora. This family produces both the biggest and smallest
vegetables in the world. Because, just as 40,000 near-invisible
buds have been counted in one five-square-millimeter space, so also
have fucus plants been gathered that were over 500 meters long!
We had been gone from the Nautilus for about an hour and a half.
It was almost noon. I spotted this fact in the perpendicularity
of the sun's rays, which were no longer refracted. The magic
of these solar colors disappeared little by little, with emerald
and sapphire shades vanishing from our surroundings altogether.
We walked with steady steps that rang on the seafloor with
astonishing intensity. The tiniest sounds were transmitted
with a speed to which the ear is unaccustomed on shore.
In fact, water is a better conductor of sound than air, and under
the waves noises carry four times as fast.
102
Just then the seafloor began to slope sharply downward.
The light took on a uniform hue. We reached a depth of 100 meters,
by which point we were undergoing a pressure of ten atmospheres.
But my diving clothes were built along such lines that I never
suffered from this pressure. I felt only a certain tightness in
the joints of my fingers, and even this discomfort soon disappeared.
As for the exhaustion bound to accompany a two-hour stroll
in such unfamiliar trappings--it was nil. Helped by the water,
my movements were executed with startling ease.
Arriving at this 300-foot depth, I still detected the sun's rays,
but just barely. Their intense brilliance had been followed
by a reddish twilight, a midpoint between day and night.
But we could see well enough to find our way, and it still wasn't
necessary to activate the Ruhmkorff device.
Just then Captain Nemo stopped. He waited until I joined him,
then he pointed a finger at some dark masses outlined in the shadows
a short distance away.
"It's the forest of Crespo Island," I thought; and I was not mistaken.
103
CHAPTER 17
An Underwater Forest
WE HAD FINALLY arrived on the outskirts of this forest,
surely one of the finest in Captain Nemo's immense domains.
He regarded it as his own and had laid the same claim to it that,
in the first days of the world, the first men had to their forests
on land. Besides, who else could dispute his ownership of this
underwater property? What other, bolder pioneer would come,
ax in hand, to clear away its dark underbrush?
This forest was made up of big treelike plants, and when we
entered beneath their huge arches, my eyes were instantly struck
by the unique arrangement of their branches--an arrangement that I
had never before encountered.
None of the weeds carpeting the seafloor, none of the branches bristling
from the shrubbery, crept, or leaned, or stretched on a horizontal plane.
They all rose right up toward the surface of the ocean.
Every filament or ribbon, no matter how thin, stood ramrod straight.
Fucus plants and creepers were growing in stiff perpendicular lines,
governed by the density of the element that generated them.
After I parted them with my hands, these otherwise motionless
plants would shoot right back to their original positions.
It was the regime of verticality.
I soon grew accustomed to this bizarre arrangement, likewise to
the comparative darkness surrounding us. The seafloor in this forest
was strewn with sharp chunks of stone that were hard to avoid.
Here the range of underwater flora seemed pretty comprehensive to me,
as well as more abundant than it might have been in the arctic
or tropical zones, where such exhibits are less common.
But for a few minutes I kept accidentally confusing the two kingdoms,
mistaking zoophytes for water plants, animals for vegetables.
And who hasn't made the same blunder? Flora and fauna are so closely
associated in the underwater world!
I observed that all these exhibits from the vegetable kingdom
were attached to the seafloor by only the most makeshift methods.
They had no roots and didn't care which solid objects
secured them, sand, shells, husks, or pebbles; they didn't
ask their hosts for sustenance, just a point of purchase.
These plants are entirely self-propagating, and the principle of
their existence lies in the water that sustains and nourishes them.
In place of leaves, most of them sprouted blades of unpredictable shape,
which were confined to a narrow gamut of colors consisting only
of pink, crimson, green, olive, tan, and brown. There I saw again,
but not yet pressed and dried like the Nautilus's specimens,
some peacock's tails spread open like fans to stir up a cooling breeze,
scarlet rosetangle, sea tangle stretching out their young and
edible shoots, twisting strings of kelp from the genus Nereocystis
that bloomed to a height of fifteen meters, bouquets of mermaid's cups
whose stems grew wider at the top, and a number of other open-sea plants,
all without flowers. "It's an odd anomaly in this bizarre element!"
as one witty naturalist puts it. "The animal kingdom blossoms,
104
and the vegetable kingdom doesn't!"
These various types of shrubbery were as big as trees in the
temperate zones; in the damp shade between them, there were clustered
actual bushes of moving flowers, hedges of zoophytes in which there
grew stony coral striped with twisting furrows, yellowish sea anemone
from the genus Caryophylia with translucent tentacles, plus anemone
with grassy tufts from the genus Zoantharia; and to complete the illusion,
minnows flitted from branch to branch like a swarm of hummingbirds,
while there rose underfoot, like a covey of snipe, yellow fish
from the genus Lepisocanthus with bristling jaws and sharp scales,
flying gurnards, and pinecone fish.
Near one o'clock, Captain Nemo gave the signal to halt.
Speaking for myself, I was glad to oblige, and we stretched out
beneath an arbor of winged kelp, whose long thin tendrils stood
up like arrows.
This short break was a delight. It lacked only the charm
of conversation. But it was impossible to speak, impossible to reply.
I simply nudged my big copper headpiece against Conseil's headpiece.
I saw a happy gleam in the gallant lad's eyes, and to communicate
his pleasure, he jiggled around inside his carapace in the
world's silliest way.
After four hours of strolling, I was quite astonished not
to feel any intense hunger. What kept my stomach in such a
good mood I'm unable to say. But, in exchange, I experienced
that irresistible desire for sleep that comes over every diver.
Accordingly, my eyes soon closed behind their heavy glass windows
and I fell into an uncontrollable doze, which until then I had been
able to fight off only through the movements of our walking.
Captain Nemo and his muscular companion were already stretched
out in this clear crystal, setting us a fine naptime example.
How long I was sunk in this torpor I cannot estimate; but when I awoke,
it seemed as if the sun were settling toward the horizon.
Captain Nemo was already up, and I had started to stretch my limbs,
when an unexpected apparition brought me sharply to my feet.
A few paces away, a monstrous, meter-high sea spider was
staring at me with beady eyes, poised to spring at me.
Although my diving suit was heavy enough to protect me from this
animal's bites, I couldn't keep back a shudder of horror.
Just then Conseil woke up, together with the Nautilus's sailor.
Captain Nemo alerted his companion to this hideous crustacean,
which a swing of the rifle butt quickly brought down, and I watched
the monster's horrible legs writhing in dreadful convulsions.
This encounter reminded me that other, more daunting animals must
be lurking in these dark reaches, and my diving suit might not be
adequate protection against their attacks. Such thoughts hadn't
previously crossed my mind, and I was determined to keep on my guard.
Meanwhile I had assumed this rest period would be the turning point
in our stroll, but I was mistaken; and instead of heading back
to the Nautilus, Captain Nemo continued his daring excursion.
The seafloor kept sinking, and its significantly steeper slope took
us to greater depths. It must have been nearly three o'clock when we
reached a narrow valley gouged between high, vertical walls and
105
located 150 meters down. Thanks to the perfection of our equipment,
we had thus gone ninety meters below the limit that nature had,
until then, set on man's underwater excursions.
I say 150 meters, although I had no instruments for estimating
this distance. But I knew that the sun's rays, even in
the clearest seas, could reach no deeper. So at precisely
this point the darkness became profound. Not a single object
was visible past ten paces. Consequently, I had begun to grope
my way when suddenly I saw the glow of an intense white light.
Captain Nemo had just activated his electric device.
His companion did likewise. Conseil and I followed suit.
By turning a switch, I established contact between the induction
coil and the glass spiral, and the sea, lit up by our four lanterns,
was illuminated for a radius of twenty-five meters.
Captain Nemo continued to plummet into the dark depths of this forest,
whose shrubbery grew ever more sparse. I observed that vegetable
life was disappearing more quickly than animal life. The open-sea
plants had already left behind the increasingly arid seafloor,
where a prodigious number of animals were still swarming:
zoophytes, articulates, mollusks, and fish.
While we were walking, I thought the lights of our Ruhmkorff devices
would automatically attract some inhabitants of these dark strata.
But if they did approach us, at least they kept at a distance regrettable
from the hunter's standpoint. Several times I saw Captain Nemo stop
and take aim with his rifle; then, after sighting down its barrel
for a few seconds, he would straighten up and resume his walk.
Finally, at around four o'clock, this marvelous excursion came to an end.
A wall of superb rocks stood before us, imposing in its sheer mass:
a pile of gigantic stone blocks, an enormous granite cliffside pitted
with dark caves but not offering a single gradient we could climb up.
This was the underpinning of Crespo Island. This was land.
The captain stopped suddenly. A gesture from him brought us to a halt,
and however much I wanted to clear this wall, I had to stop.
Here ended the domains of Captain Nemo. He had no desire to pass
beyond them. Farther on lay a part of the globe he would no
longer tread underfoot.
Our return journey began. Captain Nemo resumed the lead
in our little band, always heading forward without hesitation.
I noted that we didn't follow the same path in returning to
the Nautilus. This new route, very steep and hence very arduous,
quickly took us close to the surface of the sea. But this
return to the upper strata wasn't so sudden that decompression
took place too quickly, which could have led to serious organic
disorders and given us those internal injuries so fatal to divers.
With great promptness, the light reappeared and grew stronger;
and the refraction of the sun, already low on the horizon, again ringed
the edges of various objects with the entire color spectrum.
At a depth of ten meters, we walked amid a swarm of small fish from
every species, more numerous than birds in the air, more agile too;
but no aquatic game worthy of a gunshot had yet been offered
to our eyes.
Just then I saw the captain's weapon spring to his shoulder
106
and track a moving object through the bushes. A shot went off,
I heard a faint hissing, and an animal dropped a few paces away,
literally struck by lightning.
It was a magnificent sea otter from the genus Enhydra, the only
exclusively marine quadruped. One and a half meters long, this otter
had to be worth a good high price. Its coat, chestnut brown above and
silver below, would have made one of those wonderful fur pieces so much
in demand in the Russian and Chinese markets; the fineness and luster
of its pelt guaranteed that it would go for at least 2,000 francs.
I was full of wonderment at this unusual mammal, with its circular
head adorned by short ears, its round eyes, its white whiskers
like those on a cat, its webbed and clawed feet, its bushy tail.
Hunted and trapped by fishermen, this valuable carnivore has become
extremely rare, and it takes refuge chiefly in the northernmost
parts of the Pacific, where in all likelihood its species will soon
be facing extinction.
Captain Nemo's companion picked up the animal, loaded it on his shoulder,
and we took to the trail again.
For an hour plains of sand unrolled before our steps.
Often the seafloor rose to within two meters of the surface of the water.
I could then see our images clearly mirrored on the underside
of the waves, but reflected upside down: above us there appeared
an identical band that duplicated our every movement and gesture;
in short, a perfect likeness of the quartet near which it walked,
but with heads down and feet in the air.
Another unusual effect. Heavy clouds passed above us, forming and
fading swiftly. But after thinking it over, I realized that these
so-called clouds were caused simply by the changing densities of
the long ground swells, and I even spotted the foaming "white caps"
that their breaking crests were proliferating over the surface
of the water. Lastly, I couldn't help seeing the actual shadows
of large birds passing over our heads, swiftly skimming the surface
of the sea.
On this occasion I witnessed one of the finest gunshots ever to
thrill the marrow of a hunter. A large bird with a wide wingspan,
quite clearly visible, approached and hovered over us. When it was just a
few meters above the waves, Captain Nemo's companion took aim and fired.
The animal dropped, electrocuted, and its descent brought it within
reach of our adroit hunter, who promptly took possession of it.
It was an albatross of the finest species, a wonderful specimen
of these open-sea fowl.
This incident did not interrupt our walk. For two hours we were
sometimes led over plains of sand, sometimes over prairies of seaweed
that were quite arduous to cross. In all honesty, I was dead tired
by the time I spotted a hazy glow half a mile away, cutting through
the darkness of the waters. It was the Nautilus's beacon.
Within twenty minutes we would be on board, and there I could
breathe easy again--because my tank's current air supply seemed
to be quite low in oxygen. But I was reckoning without an encounter
that slightly delayed our arrival.
I was lagging behind some twenty paces when I saw Captain Nemo suddenly
come back toward me. With his powerful hands he sent me buckling
to the ground, while his companion did the same to Conseil. At first I
107
didn't know what to make of this sudden assault, but I was reassured
to observe the captain lying motionless beside me.
I was stretched out on the seafloor directly beneath some bushes of algae,
when I raised my head and spied two enormous masses hurtling by,
throwing off phosphorescent glimmers.
My blood turned cold in my veins! I saw that we were under threat from
a fearsome pair of sharks. They were blue sharks, dreadful man-eaters
with enormous tails, dull, glassy stares, and phosphorescent matter
oozing from holes around their snouts. They were like monstrous
fireflies that could thoroughly pulverize a man in their iron jaws!
I don't know if Conseil was busy with their classification,
but as for me, I looked at their silver bellies, their fearsome
mouths bristling with teeth, from a viewpoint less than scientific--
more as a victim than as a professor of natural history.
Luckily these voracious animals have poor eyesight. They went
by without noticing us, grazing us with their brownish fins;
and miraculously, we escaped a danger greater than encountering
a tiger deep in the jungle.
Half an hour later, guided by its electric trail, we reached
the Nautilus. The outside door had been left open, and Captain Nemo
closed it after we reentered the first cell. Then he pressed a button.
I heard pumps operating within the ship, I felt the water lowering
around me, and in a few moments the cell was completely empty.
The inside door opened, and we passed into the wardrobe.
There our diving suits were removed, not without difficulty;
and utterly exhausted, faint from lack of food and rest, I repaired
to my stateroom, full of wonder at this startling excursion on
the bottom of the sea.
108
CHAPTER 18
Four Thousand Leagues Under the Pacific
BY THE NEXT MORNING, November 18, I was fully recovered from my
exhaustion of the day before, and I climbed onto the platform just
as the Nautilus's chief officer was pronouncing his daily phrase.
It then occurred to me that these words either referred to the state
of the sea, or that they meant: "There's nothing in sight."
And in truth, the ocean was deserted. Not a sail on the horizon.
The tips of Crespo Island had disappeared during the night.
The sea, absorbing every color of the prism except its blue rays,
reflected the latter in every direction and sported a wonderful
indigo tint. The undulating waves regularly took on the appearance
of watered silk with wide stripes.
I was marveling at this magnificent ocean view when
Captain Nemo appeared. He didn't seem to notice my presence and began
a series of astronomical observations. Then, his operations finished,
he went and leaned his elbows on the beacon housing, his eyes
straying over the surface of the ocean.
Meanwhile some twenty of the Nautilus's sailors--all energetic,
well-built fellows--climbed onto the platform. They had come
to pull up the nets left in our wake during the night.
These seamen obviously belonged to different nationalities, although
indications of European physical traits could be seen in them all.
If I'm not mistaken, I recognized some Irishmen, some Frenchmen,
a few Slavs, and a native of either Greece or Crete. Even so,
these men were frugal of speech and used among themselves
only that bizarre dialect whose origin I couldn't even guess.
So I had to give up any notions of questioning them.
The nets were hauled on board. They were a breed of trawl resembling
those used off the Normandy coast, huge pouches held half open
by a floating pole and a chain laced through the lower meshes.
Trailing in this way from these iron glove makers, the resulting
receptacles scoured the ocean floor and collected every marine exhibit
in their path. That day they gathered up some unusual specimens
from these fish-filled waterways: anglerfish whose comical movements
qualify them for the epithet "clowns," black Commerson anglers equipped
with their antennas, undulating triggerfish encircled by little
red bands, bloated puffers whose venom is extremely insidious,
some olive-hued lampreys, snipefish covered with silver scales,
cutlass fish whose electrocuting power equals that of the electric eel
and the electric ray, scaly featherbacks with brown crosswise bands,
greenish codfish, several varieties of goby, etc.; finally, some fish
of larger proportions: a one-meter jack with a prominent head,
several fine bonito from the genus Scomber decked out in the colors
blue and silver, and three magnificent tuna whose high speeds
couldn't save them from our trawl.
I estimate that this cast of the net brought in more than 1,000
pounds of fish. It was a fine catch but not surprising.
In essence, these nets stayed in our wake for several hours,
109
incarcerating an entire aquatic world in prisons made of thread.
So we were never lacking in provisions of the highest quality,
which the Nautilus's speed and the allure of its electric light
could continually replenish.
These various exhibits from the sea were immediately lowered
down the hatch in the direction of the storage lockers, some to be
eaten fresh, others to be preserved.
After its fishing was finished and its air supply renewed,
I thought the Nautilus would resume its underwater excursion,
and I was getting ready to return to my stateroom, when Captain Nemo
turned to me and said without further preamble:
"Look at this ocean, professor! Doesn't it have the actual
gift of life? Doesn't it experience both anger and affection?
Last evening it went to sleep just as we did, and there it is,
waking up after a peaceful night!"
No hellos or good mornings for this gent! You would have thought
this eccentric individual was simply continuing a conversation
we'd already started!
"See!" he went on. "It's waking up under the sun's caresses!
It's going to relive its daily existence! What a fascinating
field of study lies in watching the play of its organism.
It owns a pulse and arteries, it has spasms, and I side with the
scholarly Commander Maury, who discovered that it has a circulation
as real as the circulation of blood in animals."
I'm sure that Captain Nemo expected no replies from me, and it
seemed pointless to pitch in with "Ah yes," "Exactly," or "How
right you are!" Rather, he was simply talking to himself,
with long pauses between sentences. He was meditating out loud.
"Yes," he said, "the ocean owns a genuine circulation,
and to start it going, the Creator of All Things has only
to increase its heat, salt, and microscopic animal life.
In essence, heat creates the different densities that lead
to currents and countercurrents. Evaporation, which is nil
in the High Arctic regions and very active in equatorial zones,
brings about a constant interchange of tropical and polar waters.
What's more, I've detected those falling and rising currents that make
up the ocean's true breathing. I've seen a molecule of salt water
heat up at the surface, sink into the depths, reach maximum density
at -2 degrees centigrade, then cool off, grow lighter, and rise again.
At the poles you'll see the consequences of this phenomenon,
and through this law of farseeing nature, you'll understand why
water can freeze only at the surface!"
As the captain was finishing his sentence, I said to myself:
"The pole! Is this brazen individual claiming he'll take us even
to that location?"
Meanwhile the captain fell silent and stared at the element he had
studied so thoroughly and unceasingly. Then, going on:
"Salts," he said, "fill the sea in considerable quantities, professor,
and if you removed all its dissolved saline content, you'd create
a mass measuring 4,500,000 cubic leagues, which if it were spread
110
all over the globe, would form a layer more than ten meters high.
And don't think that the presence of these salts is due merely
to some whim of nature. No. They make ocean water less open to
evaporation and prevent winds from carrying off excessive amounts
of steam, which, when condensing, would submerge the temperate zones.
Salts play a leading role, the role of stabilizer for the general
ecology of the globe!"
Captain Nemo stopped, straightened up, took a few steps along
the platform, and returned to me:
"As for those billions of tiny animals," he went on, "those infusoria
that live by the millions in one droplet of water, 800,000 of which
are needed to weigh one milligram, their role is no less important.
They absorb the marine salts, they assimilate the solid elements
in the water, and since they create coral and madrepores,
they're the true builders of limestone continents! And so,
after they've finished depriving our water drop of its mineral nutrients,
the droplet gets lighter, rises to the surface, there absorbs more
salts left behind through evaporation, gets heavier, sinks again,
and brings those tiny animals new elements to absorb. The outcome:
a double current, rising and falling, constant movement, constant life!
More intense than on land, more abundant, more infinite, such life
blooms in every part of this ocean, an element fatal to man,
they say, but vital to myriads of animals--and to me!"
When Captain Nemo spoke in this way, he was transfigured,
and he filled me with extraordinary excitement.
"There," he added, "out there lies true existence! And I can imagine
the founding of nautical towns, clusters of underwater households that,
like the Nautilus, would return to the surface of the sea to breathe
each morning, free towns if ever there were, independent cities!
Then again, who knows whether some tyrant . . ."
Captain Nemo finished his sentence with a vehement gesture.
Then, addressing me directly, as if to drive away an ugly thought:
"Professor Aronnax," he asked me, "do you know the depth of
the ocean floor?"
"At least, captain, I know what the major soundings tell us."
"Could you quote them to me, so I can double-check them as
the need arises?"
"Here," I replied, "are a few of them that stick in my memory.
If I'm not mistaken, an average depth of 8,200 meters was found in
the north Atlantic, and 2,500 meters in the Mediterranean. The most
remarkable soundings were taken in the south Atlantic near the 35th
parallel, and they gave 12,000 meters, 14,091 meters, and 15,149 meters.
All in all, it's estimated that if the sea bottom were made level,
its average depth would be about seven kilometers."
"Well, professor," Captain Nemo replied, "we'll show you better
than that, I hope. As for the average depth of this part of
the Pacific, I'll inform you that it's a mere 4,000 meters."
This said, Captain Nemo headed to the hatch and disappeared down
the ladder. I followed him and went back to the main lounge.
111
The propeller was instantly set in motion, and the log gave our speed
as twenty miles per hour.
Over the ensuing days and weeks, Captain Nemo was very frugal
with his visits. I saw him only at rare intervals. His chief
officer regularly fixed the positions I found reported on the chart,
and in such a way that I could exactly plot the Nautilus's course.
Conseil and Land spent the long hours with me. Conseil had told
his friend about the wonders of our undersea stroll, and the Canadian
was sorry he hadn't gone along. But I hoped an opportunity would
arise for a visit to the forests of Oceania.
Almost every day the panels in the lounge were open for some hours,
and our eyes never tired of probing the mysteries of the underwater world.
The Nautilus's general heading was southeast, and it stayed at a depth
between 100 and 150 meters. However, from lord-knows-what whim,
one day it did a diagonal dive by means of its slanting fins,
reaching strata located 2,000 meters underwater. The thermometer
indicated a temperature of 4.25 degrees centigrade, which at this
depth seemed to be a temperature common to all latitudes.
On November 26, at three o'clock in the morning, the Nautilus
cleared the Tropic of Cancer at longitude 172 degrees. On the 27th
it passed in sight of the Hawaiian Islands, where the famous
Captain Cook met his death on February 14, 1779. By then we
had fared 4,860 leagues from our starting point. When I arrived
on the platform that morning, I saw the Island of Hawaii two miles
to leeward, the largest of the seven islands making up this group.
I could clearly distinguish the tilled soil on its outskirts,
the various mountain chains running parallel with its coastline,
and its volcanoes, crowned by Mauna Kea, whose elevation is 5,000
meters above sea level. Among other specimens from these waterways,
our nets brought up some peacock-tailed flabellarian coral,
polyps flattened into stylish shapes and unique to this part
of the ocean.
The Nautilus kept to its southeasterly heading. On December 1
it cut the equator at longitude 142 degrees, and on the 4th
of the same month, after a quick crossing marked by no incident,
we raised the Marquesas Islands. Three miles off, in latitude 8
degrees 57' south and longitude 139 degrees 32' west, I spotted
Martin Point on Nuku Hiva, chief member of this island group
that belongs to France. I could make out only its wooded mountains
on the horizon, because Captain Nemo hated to hug shore.
There our nets brought up some fine fish samples: dolphinfish with
azure fins, gold tails, and flesh that's unrivaled in the entire world,
wrasse from the genus Hologymnosus that were nearly denuded
of scales but exquisite in flavor, knifejaws with bony beaks,
yellowish albacore that were as tasty as bonito, all fish worth
classifying in the ship's pantry.
After leaving these delightful islands to the protection of the French
flag, the Nautilus covered about 2,000 miles from December 4 to the 11th.
Its navigating was marked by an encounter with an immense school
of squid, unusual mollusks that are near neighbors of the cuttlefish.
French fishermen give them the name "cuckoldfish," and they
belong to the class Cephalopoda, family Dibranchiata,
112
consisting of themselves together with cuttlefish and argonauts.
The naturalists of antiquity made a special study of them,
and these animals furnished many ribald figures of speech for soapbox
orators in the Greek marketplace, as well as excellent dishes
for the tables of rich citizens, if we're to believe Athenaeus,
a Greek physician predating Galen.
It was during the night of December 9-10 that the Nautilus encountered
this army of distinctly nocturnal mollusks. They numbered in
the millions. They were migrating from the temperate zones toward
zones still warmer, following the itineraries of herring and sardines.
We stared at them through our thick glass windows: they swam backward
with tremendous speed, moving by means of their locomotive tubes,
chasing fish and mollusks, eating the little ones, eaten by the big ones,
and tossing in indescribable confusion the ten feet that nature
has rooted in their heads like a hairpiece of pneumatic snakes.
Despite its speed, the Nautilus navigated for several hours
in the midst of this school of animals, and its nets brought up
an incalculable number, among which I recognized all nine species
that Professor Orbigny has classified as native to the Pacific Ocean.
During this crossing, the sea continually lavished us
with the most marvelous sights. Its variety was infinite.
It changed its setting and decor for the mere pleasure of our eyes,
and we were called upon not simply to contemplate the works of our
Creator in the midst of the liquid element, but also to probe
the ocean's most daunting mysteries.
During the day of December 11, I was busy reading in the main lounge.
Ned Land and Conseil were observing the luminous waters
through the gaping panels. The Nautilus was motionless.
Its ballast tanks full, it was sitting at a depth of 1,000 meters
in a comparatively unpopulated region of the ocean where only larger
fish put in occasional appearances.
Just then I was studying a delightful book by Jean Macé, The Servants
of the Stomach, and savoring its ingenious teachings, when Conseil
interrupted my reading.
"Would master kindly come here for an instant?" he said to me
in an odd voice.
"What is it, Conseil?"
"It's something that master should see."
I stood up, went, leaned on my elbows before the window, and I saw it.
In the broad electric daylight, an enormous black mass, quite motionless,
hung suspended in the midst of the waters. I observed it carefully,
trying to find out the nature of this gigantic cetacean.
Then a sudden thought crossed my mind.
"A ship!" I exclaimed.
"Yes," the Canadian replied, "a disabled craft that's
sinking straight down!"
Ned Land was not mistaken. We were in the presence of a ship whose
severed shrouds still hung from their clasps. Its hull looked in
113
good condition, and it must have gone under only a few hours before.
The stumps of three masts, chopped off two feet above the deck,
indicated a flooding ship that had been forced to sacrifice its masting.
But it had heeled sideways, filling completely, and it was listing
to port even yet. A sorry sight, this carcass lost under the waves,
but sorrier still was the sight on its deck, where, lashed with ropes
to prevent their being washed overboard, some human corpses still lay!
I counted four of them--four men, one still standing at the helm--
then a woman, halfway out of a skylight on the afterdeck,
holding a child in her arms. This woman was young.
Under the brilliant lighting of the Nautilus's rays, I could
make out her features, which the water hadn't yet decomposed.
With a supreme effort, she had lifted her child above her head,
and the poor little creature's arms were still twined around its
mother's neck! The postures of the four seamen seemed ghastly to me,
twisted from convulsive movements, as if making a last effort
to break loose from the ropes that bound them to their ship.
And the helmsman, standing alone, calmer, his face smooth and serious,
his grizzled hair plastered to his brow, his hands clutching the wheel,
seemed even yet to be guiding his wrecked three-master through
the ocean depths!
What a scene! We stood dumbstruck, hearts pounding, before this
shipwreck caught in the act, as if it had been photographed in its
final moments, so to speak! And already I could see enormous sharks
moving in, eyes ablaze, drawn by the lure of human flesh!
Meanwhile, turning, the Nautilus made a circle around the sinking ship,
and for an instant I could read the board on its stern:
The Florida
Sunderland, England
114
CHAPTER 19
Vanikoro
THIS DREADFUL SIGHT was the first of a whole series of maritime
catastrophes that the Nautilus would encounter on its run.
When it plied more heavily traveled seas, we often saw wrecked hulls
rotting in midwater, and farther down, cannons, shells, anchors, chains,
and a thousand other iron objects rusting away.
Meanwhile, continuously swept along by the Nautilus, where we lived
in near isolation, we raised the Tuamotu Islands on December 11,
that old "dangerous group" associated with the French global
navigator Commander Bougainville; it stretches from Ducie Island
to Lazareff Island over an area of 500 leagues from the east-southeast
to the west-northwest, between latitude 13 degrees 30'
and 23 degrees 50' south, and between longitude 125 degrees 30'
and 151 degrees 30' west. This island group covers a surface area
of 370 square leagues, and it's made up of some sixty subgroups,
among which we noted the Gambier group, which is a French protectorate.
These islands are coral formations. Thanks to the work of polyps, a slow
but steady upheaval will someday connect these islands to each other.
Later on, this new island will be fused to its neighboring island groups,
and a fifth continent will stretch from New Zealand and New Caledonia
as far as the Marquesas Islands.
The day I expounded this theory to Captain Nemo, he answered me coldly:
"The earth doesn't need new continents, but new men!"
Sailors' luck led the Nautilus straight to Reao Island, one of the most
unusual in this group, which was discovered in 1822 by Captain Bell
aboard the Minerva. So I was able to study the madreporic process
that has created the islands in this ocean.
Madrepores, which one must guard against confusing with precious coral,
clothe their tissue in a limestone crust, and their variations in
structure have led my famous mentor Professor Milne-Edwards to classify
them into five divisions. The tiny microscopic animals that secrete
this polypary live by the billions in the depths of their cells.
Their limestone deposits build up into rocks, reefs, islets, islands.
In some places, they form atolls, a circular ring surrounding
a lagoon or small inner lake that gaps place in contact with
the sea. Elsewhere, they take the shape of barrier reefs,
such as those that exist along the coasts of New Caledonia
and several of the Tuamotu Islands. In still other localities,
such as Réunion Island and the island of Mauritius, they build
fringing reefs, high, straight walls next to which the ocean's
depth is considerable.
While cruising along only a few cable lengths from the underpinning
of Reao Island, I marveled at the gigantic piece of work accomplished
by these microscopic laborers. These walls were the express
achievements of madrepores known by the names fire coral,
finger coral, star coral, and stony coral. These polyps grow
exclusively in the agitated strata at the surface of the sea,
115
and so it's in the upper reaches that they begin these substructures,
which sink little by little together with the secreted rubble
binding them. This, at least, is the theory of Mr. Charles Darwin,
who thus explains the formation of atolls--a theory superior,
in my view, to the one that says these madreporic edifices sit
on the summits of mountains or volcanoes submerged a few feet
below sea level.
I could observe these strange walls quite closely: our sounding lines
indicated that they dropped perpendicularly for more than 300 meters,
and our electric beams made the bright limestone positively sparkle.
In reply to a question Conseil asked me about the growth rate
of these colossal barriers, I thoroughly amazed him by saying
that scientists put it at an eighth of an inch per biennium.
"Therefore," he said to me, "to build these walls, it took . . . ?"
"192,000 years, my gallant Conseil, which significantly extends
the biblical Days of Creation. What's more, the formation of coal--
in other words, the petrification of forests swallowed by floods--
and the cooling of basaltic rocks likewise call for a much longer
period of time. I might add that those 'days' in the Bible
must represent whole epochs and not literally the lapse of time
between two sunrises, because according to the Bible itself,
the sun doesn't date from the first day of Creation."
When the Nautilus returned to the surface of the ocean, I could take
in Reao Island over its whole flat, wooded expanse. Obviously its
madreporic rocks had been made fertile by tornadoes and thunderstorms.
One day, carried off by a hurricane from neighboring shores,
some seed fell onto these limestone beds, mixing with decomposed
particles of fish and marine plants to form vegetable humus.
Propelled by the waves, a coconut arrived on this new coast.
Its germ took root. Its tree grew tall, catching steam off the water.
A brook was born. Little by little, vegetation spread.
Tiny animals--worms, insects--rode ashore on tree trunks snatched
from islands to windward. Turtles came to lay their eggs.
Birds nested in the young trees. In this way animal life developed,
and drawn by the greenery and fertile soil, man appeared.
And that's how these islands were formed, the immense achievement
of microscopic animals.
Near evening Reao Island melted into the distance, and the Nautilus
noticeably changed course. After touching the Tropic of Capricorn
at longitude 135 degrees, it headed west-northwest, going back up
the whole intertropical zone. Although the summer sun lavished
its rays on us, we never suffered from the heat, because thirty
or forty meters underwater, the temperature didn't go over 10
degrees to 12 degrees centigrade.
By December 15 we had left the alluring Society Islands in the west,
likewise elegant Tahiti, queen of the Pacific. In the morning
I spotted this island's lofty summits a few miles to leeward.
Its waters supplied excellent fish for the tables on board:
mackerel, bonito, albacore, and a few varieties of that sea serpent
named the moray eel.
The Nautilus had cleared 8,100 miles. We logged 9,720 miles
when we passed between the Tonga Islands, where crews from
116
the Argo, Port-au-Prince, and Duke of Portland had perished,
and the island group of Samoa, scene of the slaying of Captain
de Langle, friend of that long-lost navigator, the Count de
La Pérouse. Then we raised the Fiji Islands, where savages
slaughtered sailors from the Union, as well as Captain Bureau,
commander of the Darling Josephine out of Nantes, France.
Extending over an expanse of 100 leagues north to south, and over 90
leagues east to west, this island group lies between latitude 2
degrees and 6 degrees south, and between longitude 174 degrees and 179
degrees west. It consists of a number of islands, islets, and reefs,
among which we noted the islands of Viti Levu, Vanua Levu, and Kadavu.
It was the Dutch navigator Tasman who discovered this group in 1643,
the same year the Italian physicist Torricelli invented the barometer
and King Louis XIV ascended the French throne. I'll let the reader
decide which of these deeds was more beneficial to humanity.
Coming later, Captain Cook in 1774, Rear Admiral d'Entrecasteaux in 1793,
and finally Captain Dumont d'Urville in 1827, untangled the whole
chaotic geography of this island group. The Nautilus drew near
Wailea Bay, an unlucky place for England's Captain Dillon, who was
the first to shed light on the longstanding mystery surrounding
the disappearance of ships under the Count de La Pérouse.
This bay, repeatedly dredged, furnished a huge supply of
excellent oysters. As the Roman playwright Seneca recommended,
we opened them right at our table, then stuffed ourselves.
These mollusks belonged to the species known by name as Ostrea lamellosa,
whose members are quite common off Corsica. This Wailea oysterbank
must have been extensive, and for certain, if they hadn't been
controlled by numerous natural checks, these clusters of shellfish
would have ended up jam-packing the bay, since as many as 2,000,000
eggs have been counted in a single individual.
And if Mr. Ned Land did not repent of his gluttony at our oyster fest,
it's because oysters are the only dish that never causes indigestion.
In fact, it takes no less than sixteen dozen of these headless
mollusks to supply the 315 grams that satisfy one man's minimum
daily requirement for nitrogen.
On December 25 the Nautilus navigated amid the island group
of the New Hebrides, which the Portuguese seafarer Queirós
discovered in 1606, which Commander Bougainville explored in 1768,
and to which Captain Cook gave its current name in 1773.
This group is chiefly made up of nine large islands and forms a
120-league strip from the north-northwest to the south-southeast, lying
between latitude 2 degrees and 15 degrees south, and between longitude
164 degrees and 168 degrees. At the moment of our noon sights,
we passed fairly close to the island of Aurou, which looked to me
like a mass of green woods crowned by a peak of great height.
That day it was yuletide, and it struck me that Ned Land badly
missed celebrating "Christmas," that genuine family holiday where
Protestants are such zealots.
I hadn't seen Captain Nemo for over a week, when, on the morning
of the 27th, he entered the main lounge, as usual acting as if he'd
been gone for just five minutes. I was busy tracing the Nautilus's
course on the world map. The captain approached, placed a finger
over a position on the chart, and pronounced just one word:
117
"Vanikoro."
This name was magic! It was the name of those islets
where vessels under the Count de La Pérouse had miscarried.
I straightened suddenly.
"The Nautilus is bringing us to Vanikoro?" I asked.
"Yes, professor," the captain replied.
"And I'll be able to visit those famous islands where the Compass
and the Astrolabe came to grief?"
"If you like, professor."
"When will we reach Vanikoro?"
"We already have, professor."
Followed by Captain Nemo, I climbed onto the platform, and from there
my eyes eagerly scanned the horizon.
In the northeast there emerged two volcanic islands of unequal size,
surrounded by a coral reef whose circuit measured forty miles.
We were facing the island of Vanikoro proper, to which
Captain Dumont d'Urville had given the name "Island of the Search";
we lay right in front of the little harbor of Vana, located in latitude
16 degrees 4' south and longitude 164 degrees 32' east. Its shores
seemed covered with greenery from its beaches to its summits inland,
crowned by Mt. Kapogo, which is 476 fathoms high.
After clearing the outer belt of rocks via a narrow passageway,
the Nautilus lay inside the breakers where the sea had a depth of thirty
to forty fathoms. Under the green shade of some tropical evergreens,
I spotted a few savages who looked extremely startled at our approach.
In this long, blackish object advancing flush with the water,
didn't they see some fearsome cetacean that they were obliged
to view with distrust?
Just then Captain Nemo asked me what I knew about the shipwreck
of the Count de La Pérouse.
"What everybody knows, captain," I answered him.
"And could you kindly tell me what everybody knows?" he asked me
in a gently ironic tone.
"Very easily."
I related to him what the final deeds of Captain Dumont d'Urville
had brought to light, deeds described here in this heavily condensed
summary of the whole matter.
In 1785 the Count de La Pérouse and his subordinate, Captain de Langle,
were sent by King Louis XVI of France on a voyage to circumnavigate
the globe. They boarded two sloops of war, the Compass and the Astrolabe,
which were never seen again.
In 1791, justly concerned about the fate of these two sloops
118
of war, the French government fitted out two large cargo boats,
the Search and the Hope, which left Brest on September 28 under
orders from Rear Admiral Bruni d'Entrecasteaux. Two months later,
testimony from a certain Commander Bowen, aboard the Albemarle,
alleged that rubble from shipwrecked vessels had been seen
on the coast of New Georgia. But d'Entrecasteaux was unaware
of this news--which seemed a bit dubious anyhow--and headed toward
the Admiralty Islands, which had been named in a report by one
Captain Hunter as the site of the Count de La Pérouse's shipwreck.
They looked in vain. The Hope and the Search passed right
by Vanikoro without stopping there; and overall, this voyage
was plagued by misfortune, ultimately costing the lives of
Rear Admiral d'Entrecasteaux, two of his subordinate officers,
and several seamen from his crew.
It was an old hand at the Pacific, the English adventurer
Captain Peter Dillon, who was the first to pick up the trail left
by castaways from the wrecked vessels. On May 15, 1824, his ship,
the St. Patrick, passed by Tikopia Island, one of the New Hebrides.
There a native boatman pulled alongside in a dugout canoe and sold
Dillon a silver sword hilt bearing the imprint of characters engraved
with a cutting tool known as a burin. Furthermore, this native
boatman claimed that during a stay in Vanikoro six years earlier,
he had seen two Europeans belonging to ships that had run aground
on the island's reefs many years before.
Dillon guessed that the ships at issue were those under the Count de
La Pérouse, ships whose disappearance had shaken the entire world.
He tried to reach Vanikoro, where, according to the native boatman,
a good deal of rubble from the shipwreck could still be found,
but winds and currents prevented his doing so.
Dillon returned to Calcutta. There he was able to interest
the Asiatic Society and the East India Company in his discovery.
A ship named after the Search was placed at his disposal,
and he departed on January 23, 1827, accompanied by a French deputy.
This new Search, after putting in at several stops over the Pacific,
dropped anchor before Vanikoro on July 7, 1827, in the same harbor
of Vana where the Nautilus was currently floating.
There Dillon collected many relics of the shipwreck:
iron utensils, anchors, eyelets from pulleys, swivel guns,
an eighteen-pound shell, the remains of some astronomical instruments,
a piece of sternrail, and a bronze bell bearing the inscription
"Made by Bazin," the foundry mark at Brest Arsenal around 1785.
There could no longer be any doubt.
Finishing his investigations, Dillon stayed at the site of
the casualty until the month of October. Then he left Vanikoro,
headed toward New Zealand, dropped anchor at Calcutta on April 7,
1828, and returned to France, where he received a very cordial
welcome from King Charles X.
But just then the renowned French explorer Captain Dumont d'Urville,
unaware of Dillon's activities, had already set sail to search
119
elsewhere for the site of the shipwreck. In essence, a whaling
vessel had reported that some medals and a Cross of St. Louis
had been found in the hands of savages in the Louisiade Islands
and New Caledonia.
So Captain Dumont d'Urville had put to sea in command of a vessel
named after the Astrolabe, and just two months after Dillon had
left Vanikoro, Dumont d'Urville dropped anchor before Hobart. There he
heard about Dillon's findings, and he further learned that a
certain James Hobbs, chief officer on the Union out of Calcutta,
had put to shore on an island located in latitude 8 degrees 18'
south and longitude 156 degrees 30' east, and had noted the natives
of those waterways making use of iron bars and red fabrics.
Pretty perplexed, Dumont d'Urville didn't know if he should give
credence to these reports, which had been carried in some of
the less reliable newspapers; nevertheless, he decided to start
on Dillon's trail.
On February 10, 1828, the new Astrolabe hove before Tikopia Island,
took on a guide and interpreter in the person of a deserter who had
settled there, plied a course toward Vanikoro, raised it on February 12,
sailed along its reefs until the 14th, and only on the 20th dropped
anchor inside its barrier in the harbor of Vana.
On the 23rd, several officers circled the island and brought back some
rubble of little importance. The natives, adopting a system of denial
and evasion, refused to guide them to the site of the casualty.
This rather shady conduct aroused the suspicion that the natives
had mistreated the castaways; and in truth, the natives seemed afraid
that Dumont d'Urville had come to avenge the Count de La Pérouse
and his unfortunate companions.
But on the 26th, appeased with gifts and seeing that they didn't
need to fear any reprisals, the natives led the chief officer,
Mr. Jacquinot, to the site of the shipwreck.
At this location, in three or four fathoms of water between the Paeu
and Vana reefs, there lay some anchors, cannons, and ingots
of iron and lead, all caked with limestone concretions. A launch
and whaleboat from the new Astrolabe were steered to this locality,
and after going to exhausting lengths, their crews managed to dredge
up an anchor weighing 1,800 pounds, a cast-iron eight-pounder cannon,
a lead ingot, and two copper swivel guns.
Questioning the natives, Captain Dumont d'Urville also learned that
after La Pérouse's two ships had miscarried on the island's reefs,
the count had built a smaller craft, only to go off and miscarry
a second time. Where? Nobody knew.
The commander of the new Astrolabe then had a monument erected under a
tuft of mangrove, in memory of the famous navigator and his companions.
It was a simple quadrangular pyramid, set on a coral base,
with no ironwork to tempt the natives' avarice.
Then Dumont d'Urville tried to depart; but his crews were run down from
the fevers raging on these unsanitary shores, and quite ill himself,
he was unable to weigh anchor until March 17.
Meanwhile, fearing that Dumont d'Urville wasn't abreast of
120
Dillon's activities, the French government sent a sloop of war
to Vanikoro, the Bayonnaise under Commander Legoarant de Tromelin,
who had been stationed on the American west coast. Dropping anchor
before Vanikoro a few months after the new Astrolabe's departure,
the Bayonnaise didn't find any additional evidence but verified
that the savages hadn't disturbed the memorial honoring the Count
de La Pérouse.
This is the substance of the account I gave Captain Nemo.
"So," he said to me, "the castaways built a third ship on Vanikoro Island,
and to this day, nobody knows where it went and perished?"
"Nobody knows."
Captain Nemo didn't reply but signaled me to follow him to the
main lounge. The Nautilus sank a few meters beneath the waves,
and the panels opened.
I rushed to the window and saw crusts of coral: fungus coral,
siphonula coral, alcyon coral, sea anemone from the genus Caryophylia,
plus myriads of charming fish including greenfish, damselfish,
sweepers, snappers, and squirrelfish; underneath this coral covering
I detected some rubble the old dredges hadn't been able to tear free--
iron stirrups, anchors, cannons, shells, tackle from a capstan,
a stempost, all objects hailing from the wrecked ships and now
carpeted in moving flowers.
And as I stared at this desolate wreckage, Captain Nemo told me
in a solemn voice:
"Commander La Pérouse set out on December 7, 1785, with his ships,
the Compass and the Astrolabe. He dropped anchor first at Botany Bay,
visited the Tonga Islands and New Caledonia, headed toward
the Santa Cruz Islands, and put in at Nomuka, one of the islands
in the Ha'apai group. Then his ships arrived at the unknown reefs
of Vanikoro. Traveling in the lead, the Compass ran afoul of breakers
on the southerly coast. The Astrolabe went to its rescue and also
ran aground. The first ship was destroyed almost immediately.
The second, stranded to leeward, held up for some days.
The natives gave the castaways a fair enough welcome.
The latter took up residence on the island and built a smaller
craft with rubble from the two large ones. A few seamen stayed
voluntarily in Vanikoro. The others, weak and ailing, set sail
with the Count de La Pérouse. They headed to the Solomon Islands,
and they perished with all hands on the westerly coast of the chief
island in that group, between Cape Deception and Cape Satisfaction!"
"And how do you know all this?" I exclaimed.
"Here's what I found at the very site of that final shipwreck!"
Captain Nemo showed me a tin box, stamped with the coat of arms
of France and all corroded by salt water. He opened it and I saw
a bundle of papers, yellowed but still legible.
They were the actual military orders given by France's Minister
of the Navy to Commander La Pérouse, with notes along the margin
in the handwriting of King Louis XVI!
121
"Ah, what a splendid death for a seaman!" Captain Nemo then said.
"A coral grave is a tranquil grave, and may Heaven grant that my
companions and I rest in no other!"
122
CHAPTER 20
The Torres Strait
DURING THE NIGHT of December 27-28, the Nautilus left
the waterways of Vanikoro behind with extraordinary speed.
Its heading was southwesterly, and in three days it had cleared the 750
leagues that separated La Pérouse's islands from the southeastern
tip of Papua.
On January 1, 1868, bright and early, Conseil joined me on the platform.
"Will master," the gallant lad said to me, "allow me to wish him
a happy new year?"
"Good heavens, Conseil, it's just like old times in my office
at the Botanical Gardens in Paris! I accept your kind wishes
and I thank you for them. Only, I'd like to know what you mean
by a 'happy year' under the circumstances in which we're placed.
Is it a year that will bring our imprisonment to an end, or a year
that will see this strange voyage continue?"
"Ye gods," Conseil replied, "I hardly know what to tell master.
We're certainly seeing some unusual things, and for two months
we've had no time for boredom. The latest wonder is always
the most astonishing, and if this progression keeps up, I can't
imagine what its climax will be. In my opinion, we'll never again
have such an opportunity."
"Never, Conseil."
"Besides, Mr. Nemo really lives up to his Latin name, since he couldn't
be less in the way if he didn't exist."
"True enough, Conseil."
"Therefore, with all due respect to master, I think a 'happy year'
would be a year that lets us see everything--"
"Everything, Conseil? No year could be that long. But what does
Ned Land think about all this?"
"Ned Land's thoughts are exactly the opposite of mine,"
Conseil replied. "He has a practical mind and a demanding stomach.
He's tired of staring at fish and eating them day in and day out.
This shortage of wine, bread, and meat isn't suitable for an upstanding
Anglo-Saxon, a man accustomed to beefsteak and unfazed by regular
doses of brandy or gin!"
"For my part, Conseil, that doesn't bother me in the least,
and I've adjusted very nicely to the diet on board."
"So have I," Conseil replied. "Accordingly, I think as much about
staying as Mr. Land about making his escape. Thus, if this new year
isn't a happy one for me, it will be for him, and vice versa.
No matter what happens, one of us will be pleased. So, in conclusion,
123
I wish master to have whatever his heart desires."
"Thank you, Conseil. Only I must ask you to postpone the question of new
year's gifts, and temporarily accept a hearty handshake in their place.
That's all I have on me."
"Master has never been more generous," Conseil replied.
And with that, the gallant lad went away.
By January 2 we had fared 11,340 miles, hence 5,250 leagues,
from our starting point in the seas of Japan. Before the Nautilus's
spur there stretched the dangerous waterways of the Coral Sea,
off the northeast coast of Australia. Our boat cruised along a few
miles away from that daunting shoal where Captain Cook's ships
wellnigh miscarried on June 10, 1770. The craft that Cook was aboard
charged into some coral rock, and if his vessel didn't go down,
it was thanks to the circumstance that a piece of coral broke off
in the collision and plugged the very hole it had made in the hull.
I would have been deeply interested in visiting this long,
360-league reef, against which the ever-surging sea broke
with the fearsome intensity of thunderclaps. But just then
the Nautilus's slanting fins took us to great depths, and I could
see nothing of those high coral walls. I had to rest content
with the various specimens of fish brought up by our nets.
Among others I noted some long-finned albacore, a species in the
genus Scomber, as big as tuna, bluish on the flanks, and streaked
with crosswise stripes that disappear when the animal dies.
These fish followed us in schools and supplied our table with very
dainty flesh. We also caught a large number of yellow-green gilthead,
half a decimeter long and tasting like dorado, plus some
flying gurnards, authentic underwater swallows that, on dark nights,
alternately streak air and water with their phosphorescent glimmers.
Among mollusks and zoophytes, I found in our trawl's meshes
various species of alcyonarian coral, sea urchins, hammer shells,
spurred-star shells, wentletrap snails, horn shells, glass snails.
The local flora was represented by fine floating algae:
sea tangle, and kelp from the genus Macrocystis, saturated with
the mucilage their pores perspire, from which I selected a wonderful
Nemastoma geliniaroidea, classifying it with the natural curiosities
in the museum.
On January 4, two days after crossing the Coral Sea, we raised the coast
of Papua. On this occasion Captain Nemo told me that he intended
to reach the Indian Ocean via the Torres Strait. This was the extent
of his remarks. Ned saw with pleasure that this course would bring us,
once again, closer to European seas.
The Torres Strait is regarded as no less dangerous for its
bristling reefs than for the savage inhabitants of its coasts.
It separates Queensland from the huge island of Papua,
also called New Guinea.
Papua is 400 leagues long by 130 leagues wide, with a surface area of
40,000 geographic leagues. It's located between latitude 0 degrees 19'
and 10 degrees 2' south, and between longitude 128 degrees 23'
and 146 degrees 15'. At noon, while the chief officer was taking
the sun's altitude, I spotted the summits of the Arfak Mountains,
rising in terraces and ending in sharp peaks.
124
Discovered in 1511 by the Portuguese Francisco Serrano, these shores
were successively visited by Don Jorge de Meneses in 1526, by Juan
de Grijalva in 1527, by the Spanish general Alvaro de Saavedra
in 1528, by Inigo Ortiz in 1545, by the Dutchman Schouten in 1616,
by Nicolas Sruick in 1753, by Tasman, Dampier, Fumel, Carteret,
Edwards, Bougainville, Cook, McClure, and Thomas Forrest,
by Rear Admiral d'Entrecasteaux in 1792, by Louis-Isidore Duperrey
in 1823, and by Captain Dumont d'Urville in 1827. "It's the heartland
of the blacks who occupy all Malaysia," Mr. de Rienzi has said;
and I hadn't the foggiest inkling that sailors' luck was about
to bring me face to face with these daunting Andaman aborigines.
So the Nautilus hove before the entrance to the world's
most dangerous strait, a passageway that even the boldest
navigators hesitated to clear: the strait that Luis Vaez de
Torres faced on returning from the South Seas in Melanesia,
the strait in which sloops of war under Captain Dumont d'Urville
ran aground in 1840 and nearly miscarried with all hands.
And even the Nautilus, rising superior to every danger in the sea,
was about to become intimate with its coral reefs.
The Torres Strait is about thirty-four leagues wide, but it's obstructed
by an incalculable number of islands, islets, breakers, and rocks
that make it nearly impossible to navigate. Consequently, Captain Nemo
took every desired precaution in crossing it. Floating flush
with the water, the Nautilus moved ahead at a moderate pace.
Like a cetacean's tail, its propeller churned the waves slowly.
Taking advantage of this situation, my two companions and I found seats
on the ever-deserted platform. In front of us stood the pilothouse,
and unless I'm extremely mistaken, Captain Nemo must have been inside,
steering his Nautilus himself.
Under my eyes I had the excellent charts of the Torres Strait
that had been surveyed and drawn up by the hydrographic engineer
Vincendon Dumoulin and Sublieutenant (now Admiral) Coupvent-Desbois, who
were part of Dumont d'Urville's general staff during his final
voyage to circumnavigate the globe. These, along with the efforts
of Captain King, are the best charts for untangling the snarl of this
narrow passageway, and I consulted them with scrupulous care.
Around the Nautilus the sea was boiling furiously. A stream of waves,
bearing from southeast to northwest at a speed of two and a half
miles per hour, broke over heads of coral emerging here and there.
"That's one rough sea!" Ned Land told me.
"Abominable indeed," I replied, "and hardly suitable for a craft
like the Nautilus."
"That damned captain," the Canadian went on, "must really be sure
of his course, because if these clumps of coral so much as brush us,
they'll rip our hull into a thousand pieces!"
The situation was indeed dangerous, but as if by magic, the Nautilus
seemed to glide right down the middle of these rampaging reefs.
It didn't follow the exact course of the Zealous and the new Astrolabe,
which had proved so ill-fated for Captain Dumont d'Urville. It went
more to the north, hugged the Murray Islands, and returned to the
125
southwest near Cumberland Passage. I thought it was about to charge
wholeheartedly into this opening, but it went up to the northwest,
through a large number of little-known islands and islets,
and steered toward Tound Island and the Bad Channel.
I was already wondering if Captain Nemo, rash to the point
of sheer insanity, wanted his ship to tackle the narrows
where Dumont d'Urville's two sloops of war had gone aground,
when he changed direction a second time and cut straight to the west,
heading toward Gueboroa Island.
By then it was three o'clock in the afternoon. The current was slacking
off, it was almost full tide. The Nautilus drew near this island,
which I can see to this day with its remarkable fringe of screw pines.
We hugged it from less than two miles out.
A sudden jolt threw me down. The Nautilus had just struck a reef,
and it remained motionless, listing slightly to port.
When I stood up, I saw Captain Nemo and his chief officer on
the platform. They were examining the ship's circumstances,
exchanging a few words in their incomprehensible dialect.
Here is what those circumstances entailed. Two miles to starboard lay
Gueboroa Island, its coastline curving north to west like an immense arm.
To the south and east, heads of coral were already on display,
left uncovered by the ebbing waters. We had run aground at full tide
and in one of those seas whose tides are moderate, an inconvenient
state of affairs for floating the Nautilus off. However, the ship
hadn't suffered in any way, so solidly joined was its hull.
But although it could neither sink nor split open, it was in serious
danger of being permanently attached to these reefs, and that would
have been the finish of Captain Nemo's submersible.
I was mulling this over when the captain approached, cool and calm,
forever in control of himself, looking neither alarmed nor annoyed.
"An accident?" I said to him.
"No, an incident," he answered me.
"But an incident," I replied, "that may oblige you to become
a resident again of these shores you avoid!"
Captain Nemo gave me an odd look and gestured no. Which told
me pretty clearly that nothing would ever force him to set foot
on a land mass again. Then he said:
"No, Professor Aronnax, the Nautilus isn't consigned to perdition.
It will still carry you through the midst of the ocean's wonders.
Our voyage is just beginning, and I've no desire to deprive myself
so soon of the pleasure of your company."
"Even so, Captain Nemo," I went on, ignoring his ironic turn of phrase,
"the Nautilus has run aground at a moment when the sea is full.
Now then, the tides aren't strong in the Pacific, and if you can't
unballast the Nautilus, which seems impossible to me, I don't see
how it will float off."
"You're right, professor, the Pacific tides aren't strong,"
126
Captain Nemo replied. "But in the Torres Strait, one still finds
a meter-and-a-half difference in level between high and low seas.
Today is January 4, and in five days the moon will be full.
Now then, I'll be quite astonished if that good-natured satellite
doesn't sufficiently raise these masses of water and do me a favor
for which I'll be forever grateful."
This said, Captain Nemo went below again to the Nautilus's interior,
followed by his chief officer. As for our craft, it no longer stirred,
staying as motionless as if these coral polyps had already walled
it in with their indestructible cement.
"Well, sir?" Ned Land said to me, coming up after
the captain's departure.
"Well, Ned my friend, we'll serenely wait for the tide on the 9th,
because it seems the moon will have the good nature to float us away!"
"As simple as that?"
"As simple as that."
"So our captain isn't going to drop his anchors, put his engines
on the chains, and do anything to haul us off?"
"Since the tide will be sufficient," Conseil replied simply.
The Canadian stared at Conseil, then he shrugged his shoulders.
The seaman in him was talking now.
"Sir," he answered, "you can trust me when I say this hunk
of iron will never navigate again, on the seas or under them.
It's only fit to be sold for its weight. So I think it's time
we gave Captain Nemo the slip."
"Ned my friend," I replied, "unlike you, I haven't given up on
our valiant Nautilus, and in four days we'll know where we stand
on these Pacific tides. Besides, an escape attempt might be
timely if we were in sight of the coasts of England or Provence,
but in the waterways of Papua it's another story. And we'll always
have that as a last resort if the Nautilus doesn't right itself,
which I'd regard as a real calamity."
"But couldn't we at least get the lay of the land?" Ned went on.
"Here's an island. On this island there are trees.
Under those trees land animals loaded with cutlets and roast beef,
which I'd be happy to sink my teeth into."
"In this instance our friend Ned is right," Conseil said, "and I side
with his views. Couldn't master persuade his friend Captain Nemo
to send the three of us ashore, if only so our feet don't lose
the knack of treading on the solid parts of our planet?"
"I can ask him," I replied, "but he'll refuse."
"Let master take the risk," Conseil said, "and we'll know where we
stand on the captain's affability."
Much to my surprise, Captain Nemo gave me the permission I asked for,
and he did so with grace and alacrity, not even exacting my promise
127
to return on board. But fleeing across the New Guinea territories would
be extremely dangerous, and I wouldn't have advised Ned Land to try it.
Better to be prisoners aboard the Nautilus than to fall into the hands
of Papuan natives.
The skiff was put at our disposal for the next morning.
I hardly needed to ask whether Captain Nemo would be coming along.
I likewise assumed that no crewmen would be assigned to us,
that Ned Land would be in sole charge of piloting the longboat.
Besides, the shore lay no more than two miles off, and it would
be child's play for the Canadian to guide that nimble skiff through
those rows of reefs so ill-fated for big ships.
The next day, January 5, after its deck paneling was opened,
the skiff was wrenched from its socket and launched to sea from
the top of the platform. Two men were sufficient for this operation.
The oars were inside the longboat and we had only to take our seats.
At eight o'clock, armed with rifles and axes, we pulled clear
of the Nautilus. The sea was fairly calm. A mild breeze blew
from shore. In place by the oars, Conseil and I rowed vigorously,
and Ned steered us into the narrow lanes between the breakers.
The skiff handled easily and sped swiftly.
Ned Land couldn't conceal his glee. He was a prisoner escaping
from prison and never dreaming he would need to reenter it.
"Meat!" he kept repeating. "Now we'll eat red meat! Actual game!
A real mess call, by thunder! I'm not saying fish aren't good for you,
but we mustn't overdo 'em, and a slice of fresh venison grilled
over live coals will be a nice change from our standard fare."
"You glutton," Conseil replied, "you're making my mouth water!"
"It remains to be seen," I said, "whether these forests do contain game,
and if the types of game aren't of such size that they can
hunt the hunter."
"Fine, Professor Aronnax!" replied the Canadian, whose teeth seemed
to be as honed as the edge of an ax. "But if there's no other
quadruped on this island, I'll eat tiger--tiger sirloin."
"Our friend Ned grows disturbing," Conseil replied.
"Whatever it is," Ned Land went on, "any animal having four feet
without feathers, or two feet with feathers, will be greeted by my
very own one-gun salute."
"Oh good!" I replied. "The reckless Mr. Land is at it again!"
"Don't worry, Professor Aronnax, just keep rowing!" the Canadian replied.
"I only need twenty-five minutes to serve you one of my
own special creations."
By 8:30 the Nautilus's skiff had just run gently aground on
a sandy strand, after successfully clearing the ring of coral
that surrounds Gueboroa Island.
128
CHAPTER 21
Some Days Ashore
STEPPING ASHORE had an exhilarating effect on me. Ned Land
tested the soil with his foot, as if he were laying claim to it.
Yet it had been only two months since we had become, as Captain Nemo
expressed it, "passengers on the Nautilus," in other words,
the literal prisoners of its commander.
In a few minutes we were a gunshot away from the coast. The soil was
almost entirely madreporic, but certain dry stream beds were strewn
with granite rubble, proving that this island was of primordial origin.
The entire horizon was hidden behind a curtain of wonderful forests.
Enormous trees, sometimes as high as 200 feet, were linked to each
other by garlands of tropical creepers, genuine natural hammocks
that swayed in a mild breeze. There were mimosas, banyan trees,
beefwood, teakwood, hibiscus, screw pines, palm trees, all mingling
in wild profusion; and beneath the shade of their green canopies,
at the feet of their gigantic trunks, there grew orchids,
leguminous plants, and ferns.
Meanwhile, ignoring all these fine specimens of Papuan flora,
the Canadian passed up the decorative in favor of the functional.
He spotted a coconut palm, beat down some of its fruit, broke them open,
and we drank their milk and ate their meat with a pleasure that was
a protest against our standard fare on the Nautilus.
"Excellent!" Ned Land said.
"Exquisite!" Conseil replied.
"And I don't think," the Canadian said, "that your Nemo would object
to us stashing a cargo of coconuts aboard his vessel?"
"I imagine not," I replied, "but he won't want to sample them."
"Too bad for him!" Conseil said.
"And plenty good for us!" Ned Land shot back. "There'll be
more left over!"
"A word of caution, Mr. Land," I told the harpooner, who was about
to ravage another coconut palm. "Coconuts are admirable things,
but before we stuff the skiff with them, it would be wise to find
out whether this island offers other substances just as useful.
Some fresh vegetables would be well received in the Nautilus's pantry."
"Master is right," Conseil replied, "and I propose that we set aside
three places in our longboat: one for fruit, another for vegetables,
and a third for venison, of which I still haven't glimpsed
the tiniest specimen."
129
"Don't give up so easily, Conseil," the Canadian replied.
"So let's continue our excursion," I went on, "but keep a sharp lookout.
This island seems uninhabited, but it still might harbor certain
individuals who aren't so finicky about the sort of game they eat!"
"Hee hee!" Ned put in, with a meaningful movement of his jaws.
"Ned! Oh horrors!" Conseil exclaimed.
"Ye gods," the Canadian shot back, "I'm starting to appreciate
the charms of cannibalism!"
"Ned, Ned! Don't say that!" Conseil answered. "You a cannibal?
Why, I'll no longer be safe next to you, I who share your cabin!
Does this mean I'll wake up half devoured one fine day?"
"I'm awfully fond of you, Conseil my friend, but not enough to eat
you when there's better food around."
"Then I daren't delay," Conseil replied. "The hunt is on!
We absolutely must bag some game to placate this man-eater, or one
of these mornings master won't find enough pieces of his manservant
to serve him."
While exchanging this chitchat, we entered beneath the dark canopies
of the forest, and for two hours we explored it in every direction.
We couldn't have been luckier in our search for edible vegetation,
and some of the most useful produce in the tropical zones supplied
us with a valuable foodstuff missing on board.
I mean the breadfruit tree, which is quite abundant on Gueboroa Island,
and there I chiefly noted the seedless variety that in Malaysia
is called "rima."
This tree is distinguished from other trees by a straight trunk forty
feet high. To the naturalist's eye, its gracefully rounded crown,
formed of big multilobed leaves, was enough to denote the artocarpus
that has been so successfully transplanted to the Mascarene Islands east of
Madagascar. From its mass of greenery, huge globular fruit stood out,
a decimeter wide and furnished on the outside with creases that
assumed a hexangular pattern. It's a handy plant that nature gives
to regions lacking in wheat; without needing to be cultivated,
it bears fruit eight months out of the year.
Ned Land was on familiar terms with this fruit. He had already eaten
it on his many voyages and knew how to cook its edible substance.
So the very sight of it aroused his appetite, and he couldn't
control himself.
"Sir," he told me, "I'll die if I don't sample a little breadfruit pasta!"
"Sample some, Ned my friend, sample all you like. We're here
to conduct experiments, let's conduct them."
"It won't take a minute," the Canadian replied.
Equipped with a magnifying glass, he lit a fire of deadwood
130
that was soon crackling merrily. Meanwhile Conseil and I selected
the finest artocarpus fruit. Some still weren't ripe enough,
and their thick skins covered white, slightly fibrous pulps.
But a great many others were yellowish and gelatinous, just begging
to be picked.
This fruit contained no pits. Conseil brought a dozen of them
to Ned Land, who cut them into thick slices and placed them over
a fire of live coals, all the while repeating:
"You'll see, sir, how tasty this bread is!"
"Especially since we've gone without baked goods for so long,"
Conseil said.
"It's more than just bread," the Canadian added. "It's a dainty pastry.
You've never eaten any, sir?"
"No, Ned."
"All right, get ready for something downright delectable!
If you don't come back for seconds, I'm no longer the King of Harpooners!"
After a few minutes, the parts of the fruit exposed to the fire were
completely toasted. On the inside there appeared some white pasta,
a sort of soft bread center whose flavor reminded me of artichoke.
This bread was excellent, I must admit, and I ate it with great pleasure.
"Unfortunately," I said, "this pasta won't stay fresh, so it seems
pointless to make a supply for on board."
"By thunder, sir!" Ned Land exclaimed. "There you go,
talking like a naturalist, but meantime I'll be acting like a baker!
Conseil, harvest some of this fruit to take with us when we go back."
"And how will you prepare it?" I asked the Canadian.
"I'll make a fermented batter from its pulp that'll keep
indefinitely without spoiling. When I want some, I'll just cook
it in the galley on board--it'll have a slightly tart flavor,
but you'll find it excellent."
"So, Mr. Ned, I see that this bread is all we need--"
"Not quite, professor," the Canadian replied. "We need some fruit
to go with it, or at least some vegetables."
"Then let's look for fruit and vegetables."
When our breadfruit harvesting was done, we took to the trail
to complete this "dry-land dinner."
We didn't search in vain, and near noontime we had an ample supply
of bananas. This delicious produce from the Torrid Zones ripens
all year round, and Malaysians, who give them the name "pisang,"
eat them without bothering to cook them. In addition to bananas,
131
we gathered some enormous jackfruit with a very tangy flavor,
some tasty mangoes, and some pineapples of unbelievable size.
But this foraging took up a good deal of our time, which, even so,
we had no cause to regret.
Conseil kept Ned under observation. The harpooner walked in the lead,
and during his stroll through this forest, he gathered with sure hands
some excellent fruit that should have completed his provisions.
"So," Conseil asked, "you have everything you need, Ned my friend?"
"Humph!" the Canadian put in.
"What! You're complaining?"
"All this vegetation doesn't make a meal," Ned replied.
"Just side dishes, dessert. But where's the soup course?
Where's the roast?"
"Right," I said. "Ned promised us cutlets, which seems highly
questionable to me."
"Sir," the Canadian replied, "our hunting not only isn't over,
it hasn't even started. Patience! We're sure to end up bumping
into some animal with either feathers or fur, if not in this locality,
then in another."
"And if not today, then tomorrow, because we mustn't wander too far off,"
Conseil added. "That's why I propose that we return to the skiff."
"What! Already!" Ned exclaimed.
"We ought to be back before nightfall," I said.
"But what hour is it, then?" the Canadian asked.
"Two o'clock at least," Conseil replied.
"How time flies on solid ground!" exclaimed Mr. Ned Land with a
sigh of regret.
"Off we go!" Conseil replied.
So we returned through the forest, and we completed our harvest
by making a clean sweep of some palm cabbages that had to be picked
from the crowns of their trees, some small beans that I recognized
as the "abrou" of the Malaysians, and some high-quality yams.
We were overloaded when we arrived at the skiff. However, Ned Land
still found these provisions inadequate. But fortune smiled on him.
Just as we were boarding, he spotted several trees twenty-five
to thirty feet high, belonging to the palm species.
As valuable as the artocarpus, these trees are justly ranked among
the most useful produce in Malaysia.
They were sago palms, vegetation that grows without being cultivated;
like mulberry trees, they reproduce by means of shoots and seeds.
Ned Land knew how to handle these trees. Taking his ax and wielding
it with great vigor, he soon stretched out on the ground two or
132
three sago palms, whose maturity was revealed by the white dust
sprinkled over their palm fronds.
I watched him more as a naturalist than as a man in hunger.
He began by removing from each trunk an inch-thick strip of bark that
covered a network of long, hopelessly tangled fibers that were puttied
with a sort of gummy flour. This flour was the starch-like sago,
an edible substance chiefly consumed by the Melanesian peoples.
For the time being, Ned Land was content to chop these trunks into pieces,
as if he were making firewood; later he would extract the flour
by sifting it through cloth to separate it from its fibrous ligaments,
let it dry out in the sun, and leave it to harden inside molds.
Finally, at five o'clock in the afternoon, laden with all our treasures,
we left the island beach and half an hour later pulled alongside
the Nautilus. Nobody appeared on our arrival. The enormous
sheet-iron cylinder seemed deserted. Our provisions loaded on board,
I went below to my stateroom. There I found my supper ready.
I ate and then fell asleep.
The next day, January 6: nothing new on board. Not a sound inside,
not a sign of life. The skiff stayed alongside in the same place
we had left it. We decided to return to Gueboroa Island. Ned Land
hoped for better luck in his hunting than on the day before,
and he wanted to visit a different part of the forest.
By sunrise we were off. Carried by an inbound current, the longboat
reached the island in a matter of moments.
We disembarked, and thinking it best to abide by the Canadian's instincts,
we followed Ned Land, whose long legs threatened to outpace us.
Ned Land went westward up the coast; then, fording some stream beds,
he reached open plains that were bordered by wonderful forests.
Some kingfishers lurked along the watercourses, but they didn't
let us approach. Their cautious behavior proved to me that these
winged creatures knew where they stood on bipeds of our species,
and I concluded that if this island wasn't inhabited, at least
human beings paid it frequent visits.
After crossing a pretty lush prairie, we arrived on the outskirts
of a small wood, enlivened by the singing and soaring of a large
number of birds.
"Still, they're merely birds," Conseil said.
"But some are edible," the harpooner replied.
"Wrong, Ned my friend," Conseil answered, "because I see only
ordinary parrots here."
"Conseil my friend," Ned replied in all seriousness, "parrots are
like pheasant to people with nothing else on their plates."
"And I might add," I said, "that when these birds are properly cooked,
they're at least worth a stab of the fork."
133
Indeed, under the dense foliage of this wood, a whole host of parrots
fluttered from branch to branch, needing only the proper upbringing
to speak human dialects. At present they were cackling in chorus
with parakeets of every color, with solemn cockatoos that seemed to be
pondering some philosophical problem, while bright red lories passed
by like pieces of bunting borne on the breeze, in the midst of kalao
parrots raucously on the wing, Papuan lories painted the subtlest
shades of azure, and a whole variety of delightful winged creatures,
none terribly edible.
However, one bird unique to these shores, which never passes
beyond the boundaries of the Aru and Papuan Islands, was missing
from this collection. But I was given a chance to marvel at
it soon enough.
After crossing through a moderately dense thicket, we again found
some plains obstructed by bushes. There I saw some magnificent birds
soaring aloft, the arrangement of their long feathers causing them to head
into the wind. Their undulating flight, the grace of their aerial curves,
and the play of their colors allured and delighted the eye.
I had no trouble identifying them.
"Birds of paradise!" I exclaimed.
"Order Passeriforma, division Clystomora," Conseil replied.
"Partridge family?" Ned Land asked.
"I doubt it, Mr. Land. Nevertheless, I'm counting on your dexterity
to catch me one of these delightful representatives of tropical nature!"
"I'll give it a try, professor, though I'm handier with a harpoon
than a rifle."
Malaysians, who do a booming business in these birds with the Chinese,
have various methods for catching them that we couldn't use.
Sometimes they set snares on the tops of the tall trees that
the bird of paradise prefers to inhabit. At other times they
capture it with a tenacious glue that paralyzes its movements.
They will even go so far as to poison the springs where these fowl
habitually drink. But in our case, all we could do was fire
at them on the wing, which left us little chance of getting one.
And in truth, we used up a good part of our ammunition in vain.
Near eleven o'clock in the morning, we cleared the lower
slopes of the mountains that form the island's center,
and we still hadn't bagged a thing. Hunger spurred us on.
The hunters had counted on consuming the proceeds of their hunting,
and they had miscalculated. Luckily, and much to his surprise,
Conseil pulled off a right-and-left shot and insured our breakfast.
He brought down a white pigeon and a ringdove, which were briskly plucked,
hung from a spit, and roasted over a blazing fire of deadwood.
While these fascinating animals were cooking, Ned prepared some bread
from the artocarpus. Then the pigeon and ringdove were devoured
to the bones and declared excellent. Nutmeg, on which these birds
habitually gorge themselves, sweetens their flesh and makes
it delicious eating.
"They taste like chicken stuffed with truffles," Conseil said.
134
"All right, Ned," I asked the Canadian, "now what do you need?"
"Game with four paws, Professor Aronnax," Ned Land replied.
"All these pigeons are only appetizers, snacks. So till I've bagged
an animal with cutlets, I won't be happy!"
"Nor I, Ned, until I've caught a bird of paradise."
"Then let's keep hunting," Conseil replied, "but while heading back
to the sea. We've arrived at the foothills of these mountains,
and I think we'll do better if we return to the forest regions."
It was good advice and we took it. After an hour's walk we reached
a genuine sago palm forest. A few harmless snakes fled underfoot.
Birds of paradise stole off at our approach, and I was in real
despair of catching one when Conseil, walking in the lead,
stooped suddenly, gave a triumphant shout, and came back to me,
carrying a magnificent bird of paradise.
"Oh bravo, Conseil!" I exclaimed.
"Master is too kind," Conseil replied.
"Not at all, my boy. That was a stroke of genius, catching one
of these live birds with your bare hands!"
"If master will examine it closely, he'll see that I deserve
no great praise."
"And why not, Conseil?"
"Because this bird is as drunk as a lord."
"Drunk?"
"Yes, master, drunk from the nutmegs it was devouring under that nutmeg
tree where I caught it. See, Ned my friend, see the monstrous
results of intemperance!"
"Damnation!" the Canadian shot back. "Considering the amount of gin
I've had these past two months, you've got nothing to complain about!"
Meanwhile I was examining this unusual bird. Conseil was not mistaken.
Tipsy from that potent juice, our bird of paradise had been reduced
to helplessness. It was unable to fly. It was barely able to walk.
But this didn't alarm me, and I just let it sleep off its nutmeg.
This bird belonged to the finest of the eight species credited
to Papua and its neighboring islands. It was a "great emerald,"
one of the rarest birds of paradise. It measured three decimeters long.
Its head was comparatively small, and its eyes, placed near the opening of
its beak, were also small. But it offered a wonderful mixture of hues:
a yellow beak, brown feet and claws, hazel wings with purple tips,
pale yellow head and scruff of the neck, emerald throat, the belly
and chest maroon to brown. Two strands, made of a horn substance
covered with down, rose over its tail, which was lengthened by long,
very light feathers of wonderful fineness, and they completed
the costume of this marvelous bird that the islanders have poetically
named "the sun bird."
135
How I wished I could take this superb bird of paradise back to Paris,
to make a gift of it to the zoo at the Botanical Gardens,
which doesn't own a single live specimen.
"So it must be a rarity or something?" the Canadian asked,
in the tone of a hunter who, from the viewpoint of his art,
gives the game a pretty low rating.
"A great rarity, my gallant comrade, and above all very hard to
capture alive. And even after they're dead, there's still a major
market for these birds. So the natives have figured out how to create
fake ones, like people create fake pearls or diamonds."
"What!" Conseil exclaimed. "They make counterfeit birds of paradise?"
"Yes, Conseil."
"And is master familiar with how the islanders go about it?"
"Perfectly familiar. During the easterly monsoon season,
birds of paradise lose the magnificent feathers around their tails
that naturalists call 'below-the-wing' feathers. These feathers
are gathered by the fowl forgers and skillfully fitted onto some poor
previously mutilated parakeet. Then they paint over the suture,
varnish the bird, and ship the fruits of their unique labors
to museums and collectors in Europe."
"Good enough!" Ned Land put in. "If it isn't the right bird,
it's still the right feathers, and so long as the merchandise isn't
meant to be eaten, I see no great harm!"
But if my desires were fulfilled by the capture of this bird of paradise,
those of our Canadian huntsman remained unsatisfied. Luckily, near two
o'clock Ned Land brought down a magnificent wild pig of the type
the natives call "bari-outang." This animal came in the nick of time
for us to bag some real quadruped meat, and it was warmly welcomed.
Ned Land proved himself quite gloriously with his gunshot.
Hit by an electric bullet, the pig dropped dead on the spot.
The Canadian properly skinned and cleaned it, after removing half
a dozen cutlets destined to serve as the grilled meat course of our
evening meal. Then the hunt was on again, and once more would
be marked by the exploits of Ned and Conseil.
In essence, beating the bushes, the two friends flushed a herd
of kangaroos that fled by bounding away on their elastic paws.
But these animals didn't flee so swiftly that our electric capsules
couldn't catch up with them.
"Oh, professor!" shouted Ned Land, whose hunting fever had gone
to his brain. "What excellent game, especially in a stew!
What a supply for the Nautilus! Two, three, five down!
And just think how we'll devour all this meat ourselves,
while those numbskulls on board won't get a shred!"
In his uncontrollable glee, I think the Canadian might have
136
slaughtered the whole horde, if he hadn't been so busy talking!
But he was content with a dozen of these fascinating marsupials,
which make up the first order of aplacental mammals, as Conseil
just had to tell us.
These animals were small in stature. They were a species of those
"rabbit kangaroos" that usually dwell in the hollows of trees
and are tremendously fast; but although of moderate dimensions,
they at least furnish a meat that's highly prized.
We were thoroughly satisfied with the results of our hunting.
A gleeful Ned proposed that we return the next day to this magic island,
which he planned to depopulate of its every edible quadruped.
But he was reckoning without events.
By six o'clock in the evening, we were back on the beach.
The skiff was aground in its usual place. The Nautilus, looking like
a long reef, emerged from the waves two miles offshore.
Without further ado, Ned Land got down to the important business
of dinner. He came wonderfully to terms with its entire cooking.
Grilling over the coals, those cutlets from the "bari-outang" soon
gave off a succulent aroma that perfumed the air.
But I catch myself following in the Canadian's footsteps.
Look at me--in ecstasy over freshly grilled pork!
Please grant me a pardon as I've already granted one to Mr. Land,
and on the same grounds!
In short, dinner was excellent. Two ringdoves rounded out this
extraordinary menu. Sago pasta, bread from the artocarpus, mangoes,
half a dozen pineapples, and the fermented liquor from certain
coconuts heightened our glee. I suspect that my two fine companions
weren't quite as clearheaded as one could wish.
"What if we don't return to the Nautilus this evening?" Conseil said.
"What if we never return to it?" Ned Land added.
Just then a stone whizzed toward us, landed at our feet, and cut
short the harpooner's proposition.
137
CHAPTER 22
The Lightning Bolts of Captain Nemo
WITHOUT STANDING UP, we stared in the direction of the forest, my hand
stopping halfway to my mouth, Ned Land's completing its assignment.
"Stones don't fall from the sky," Conseil said, "or else they
deserve to be called meteorites."
A second well-polished stone removed a tasty ringdove leg from
Conseil's hand, giving still greater relevance to his observation.
We all three stood up, rifles to our shoulders, ready to
answer any attack.
"Apes maybe?" Ned Land exclaimed.
"Nearly," Conseil replied. "Savages."
"Head for the skiff!" I said, moving toward the sea.
Indeed, it was essential to beat a retreat because some twenty natives,
armed with bows and slings, appeared barely a hundred paces off,
on the outskirts of a thicket that masked the horizon to our right.
The skiff was aground ten fathoms away from us.
The savages approached without running, but they favored us with a
show of the greatest hostility. It was raining stones and arrows.
Ned Land was unwilling to leave his provisions behind, and despite
the impending danger, he clutched his pig on one side, his kangaroos
on the other, and scampered off with respectable speed.
In two minutes we were on the strand. Loading provisions and weapons
into the skiff, pushing it to sea, and positioning its two oars
were the work of an instant. We hadn't gone two cable lengths
when a hundred savages, howling and gesticulating, entered the water
up to their waists. I looked to see if their appearance might
draw some of the Nautilus's men onto the platform. But no.
Lying well out, that enormous machine still seemed completely deserted.
Twenty minutes later we boarded ship. The hatches were open.
After mooring the skiff, we reentered the Nautilus's interior.
I went below to the lounge, from which some chords were wafting.
Captain Nemo was there, leaning over the organ, deep in a musical trance.
"Captain!" I said to him.
He didn't hear me.
"Captain!" I went on, touching him with my hand.
He trembled, and turning around:
138
"Ah, it's you, professor!" he said to me. "Well, did you have
a happy hunt? Was your herb gathering a success?"
"Yes, captain," I replied, "but unfortunately we've brought back
a horde of bipeds whose proximity worries me."
"What sort of bipeds?"
"Savages."
"Savages!" Captain Nemo replied in an ironic tone. "You set
foot on one of the shores of this globe, professor, and you're
surprised to find savages there? Where aren't there savages?
And besides, are they any worse than men elsewhere, these people
you call savages?"
"But captain--"
"Speaking for myself, sir, I've encountered them everywhere."
"Well then," I replied, "if you don't want to welcome them aboard
the Nautilus, you'd better take some precautions!"
"Easy, professor, no cause for alarm."
"But there are a large number of these natives."
"What's your count?"
"At least a hundred."
"Professor Aronnax," replied Captain Nemo, whose fingers took
their places again on the organ keys, "if every islander in Papua
were to gather on that beach, the Nautilus would still have nothing
to fear from their attacks!"
The captain's fingers then ran over the instrument's keyboard,
and I noticed that he touched only its black keys, which gave
his melodies a basically Scottish color. Soon he had forgotten my
presence and was lost in a reverie that I no longer tried to dispel.
I climbed onto the platform. Night had already fallen, because in
this low latitude the sun sets quickly, without any twilight.
I could see Gueboroa Island only dimly. But numerous fires had been
kindled on the beach, attesting that the natives had no thoughts
of leaving it.
For several hours I was left to myself, sometimes musing on the islanders--
but no longer fearing them because the captain's unflappable confidence
had won me over--and sometimes forgetting them to marvel at the splendors
of this tropical night. My memories took wing toward France, in the wake
of those zodiacal stars due to twinkle over it in a few hours.
The moon shone in the midst of the constellations at their zenith.
I then remembered that this loyal, good-natured satellite
would return to this same place the day after tomorrow,
to raise the tide and tear the Nautilus from its coral bed.
139
Near midnight, seeing that all was quiet over the darkened waves
as well as under the waterside trees, I repaired to my cabin and fell
into a peaceful sleep.
The night passed without mishap. No doubt the Papuans had been
frightened off by the mere sight of this monster aground in
the bay, because our hatches stayed open, offering easy access
to the Nautilus's interior.
At six o'clock in the morning, January 8, I climbed onto the platform.
The morning shadows were lifting. The island was soon on view
through the dissolving mists, first its beaches, then its summits.
The islanders were still there, in greater numbers than on the day before,
perhaps 500 or 600 of them. Taking advantage of the low tide,
some of them had moved forward over the heads of coral to within
two cable lengths of the Nautilus. I could easily distinguish them.
They obviously were true Papuans, men of fine stock, athletic in build,
forehead high and broad, nose large but not flat, teeth white.
Their woolly, red-tinted hair was in sharp contrast to their bodies, which
were black and glistening like those of Nubians. Beneath their pierced,
distended earlobes there dangled strings of beads made from bone.
Generally these savages were naked. I noted some women among them,
dressed from hip to knee in grass skirts held up by belts made
of vegetation. Some of the chieftains adorned their necks with
crescents and with necklaces made from beads of red and white glass.
Armed with bows, arrows, and shields, nearly all of them carried
from their shoulders a sort of net, which held those polished stones
their slings hurl with such dexterity.
One of these chieftains came fairly close to the Nautilus,
examining it with care. He must have been a "mado" of high rank,
because he paraded in a mat of banana leaves that had ragged edges
and was accented with bright colors.
I could easily have picked off this islander, he stood at such close
range; but I thought it best to wait for an actual show of hostility.
Between Europeans and savages, it's acceptable for Europeans to shoot
back but not to attack first.
During this whole time of low tide, the islanders lurked near
the Nautilus, but they weren't boisterous. I often heard them repeat
the word "assai," and from their gestures I understood they were
inviting me to go ashore, an invitation I felt obliged to decline.
So the skiff didn't leave shipside that day, much to the
displeasure of Mr. Land who couldn't complete his provisions.
The adroit Canadian spent his time preparing the meat and flour
products he had brought from Gueboroa Island. As for the savages,
they went back to shore near eleven o'clock in the morning, when the heads
of coral began to disappear under the waves of the rising tide.
But I saw their numbers swell considerably on the beach.
It was likely that they had come from neighboring islands
or from the mainland of Papua proper. However, I didn't see one
local dugout canoe.
Having nothing better to do, I decided to dredge these beautiful,
140
clear waters, which exhibited a profusion of shells, zoophytes,
and open-sea plants. Besides, it was the last day the Nautilus
would spend in these waterways, if, tomorrow, it still floated off
to the open sea as Captain Nemo had promised.
So I summoned Conseil, who brought me a small, light dragnet similar
to those used in oyster fishing.
"What about these savages?" Conseil asked me. "With all due
respect to master, they don't strike me as very wicked!"
"They're cannibals even so, my boy."
"A person can be both a cannibal and a decent man," Conseil replied,
"just as a person can be both gluttonous and honorable.
The one doesn't exclude the other."
"Fine, Conseil! And I agree that there are honorable cannibals who
decently devour their prisoners. However, I'm opposed to being devoured,
even in all decency, so I'll keep on my guard, especially since
the Nautilus's commander seems to be taking no precautions.
And now let's get to work!"
For two hours our fishing proceeded energetically but without
bringing up any rarities. Our dragnet was filled with Midas abalone,
harp shells, obelisk snails, and especially the finest hammer shells
I had seen to that day. We also gathered in a few sea cucumbers,
some pearl oysters, and a dozen small turtles that we saved for
the ship's pantry.
But just when I least expected it, I laid my hands on a wonder, a natural
deformity I'd have to call it, something very seldom encountered.
Conseil had just made a cast of the dragnet, and his gear had
come back up loaded with a variety of fairly ordinary seashells,
when suddenly he saw me plunge my arms swiftly into the net, pull out
a shelled animal, and give a conchological yell, in other words,
the most piercing yell a human throat can produce.
"Eh? What happened to master?" Conseil asked, very startled.
"Did master get bitten?"
"No, my boy, but I'd gladly have sacrificed a finger for such a find!"
"What find?"
"This shell," I said, displaying the subject of my triumph.
"But that's simply an olive shell of the 'tent olive' species,
genus Oliva, order Pectinibranchia, class Gastropoda, branch Mollusca--"
"Yes, yes, Conseil! But instead of coiling from right to left,
this olive shell rolls from left to right!"
"It can't be!" Conseil exclaimed.
"Yes, my boy, it's a left-handed shell!"
"A left-handed shell!" Conseil repeated, his heart pounding.
"Look at its spiral!"
141
"Oh, master can trust me on this," Conseil said, taking the valuable
shell in trembling hands, "but never have I felt such excitement!"
And there was good reason to be excited! In fact, as naturalists
have ventured to observe, "dextrality" is a well-known law of nature.
In their rotational and orbital movements, stars and their satellites go
from right to left. Man uses his right hand more often than his left,
and consequently his various instruments and equipment (staircases, locks,
watch springs, etc.) are designed to be used in a right-to-left manner.
Now then, nature has generally obeyed this law in coiling her shells.
They're right-handed with only rare exceptions, and when by chance
a shell's spiral is left-handed, collectors will pay its weight
in gold for it.
So Conseil and I were deep in the contemplation of our treasure,
and I was solemnly promising myself to enrich the Paris Museum
with it, when an ill-timed stone, hurled by one of the islanders,
whizzed over and shattered the valuable object in Conseil's hands.
I gave a yell of despair! Conseil pounced on his rifle and aimed
at a savage swinging a sling just ten meters away from him.
I tried to stop him, but his shot went off and shattered a bracelet
of amulets dangling from the islander's arm.
"Conseil!" I shouted. "Conseil!"
"Eh? What? Didn't master see that this man-eater initiated the attack?"
"A shell isn't worth a human life!" I told him.
"Oh, the rascal!" Conseil exclaimed. "I'd rather he cracked
my shoulder!"
Conseil was in dead earnest, but I didn't subscribe to his views.
However, the situation had changed in only a short time and we
hadn't noticed. Now some twenty dugout canoes were surrounding
the Nautilus. Hollowed from tree trunks, these dugouts were long,
narrow, and well designed for speed, keeping their balance by means
of two bamboo poles that floated on the surface of the water.
They were maneuvered by skillful, half-naked paddlers, and I viewed
their advance with definite alarm.
It was obvious these Papuans had already entered into relations with
Europeans and knew their ships. But this long, iron cylinder lying
in the bay, with no masts or funnels--what were they to make of it?
Nothing good, because at first they kept it at a respectful distance.
However, seeing that it stayed motionless, they regained confidence
little by little and tried to become more familiar with it.
Now then, it was precisely this familiarity that we needed to prevent.
Since our weapons made no sound when they went off, they would
have only a moderate effect on these islanders, who reputedly
respect nothing but noisy mechanisms. Without thunderclaps,
lightning bolts would be much less frightening, although the danger
lies in the flash, not the noise.
Just then the dugout canoes drew nearer to the Nautilus, and a cloud
of arrows burst over us.
"Fire and brimstone, it's hailing!" Conseil said.
142
"And poisoned hail perhaps!"
"We've got to alert Captain Nemo," I said, reentering the hatch.
I went below to the lounge. I found no one there. I ventured
a knock at the door opening into the captain's stateroom.
The word "Enter!" answered me. I did so and found Captain Nemo
busy with calculations in which there was no shortage of X and
other algebraic signs.
"Am I disturbing you?" I said out of politeness.
"Correct, Professor Aronnax," the captain answered me.
"But I imagine you have pressing reasons for looking me up?"
"Very pressing. Native dugout canoes are surrounding us, and in a few
minutes we're sure to be assaulted by several hundred savages."
"Ah!" Captain Nemo put in serenely. "They've come in their dugouts?"
"Yes, sir."
"Well, sir, closing the hatches should do the trick."
"Precisely, and that's what I came to tell you--"
"Nothing easier," Captain Nemo said.
And he pressed an electric button, transmitting an order to
the crew's quarters.
"There, sir, all under control!" he told me after a few moments.
"The skiff is in place and the hatches are closed. I don't imagine
you're worried that these gentlemen will stave in walls that shells
from your frigate couldn't breach?"
"No, captain, but one danger still remains."
"What's that, sir?"
"Tomorrow at about this time, we'll need to reopen the hatches
to renew the Nautilus's air."
"No argument, sir, since our craft breathes in the manner
favored by cetaceans."
"But if these Papuans are occupying the platform at that moment,
I don't see how you can prevent them from entering."
"Then, sir, you assume they'll board the ship?"
"I'm certain of it."
"Well, sir, let them come aboard. I see no reason to prevent them.
Deep down they're just poor devils, these Papuans, and I don't
want my visit to Gueboroa Island to cost the life of a single one
143
of these unfortunate people!"
On this note I was about to withdraw; but Captain Nemo detained
me and invited me to take a seat next to him. He questioned me
with interest on our excursions ashore and on our hunting, but seemed
not to understand the Canadian's passionate craving for red meat.
Then our conversation skimmed various subjects, and without being
more forthcoming, Captain Nemo proved more affable.
Among other things, we came to talk of the Nautilus's circumstances,
aground in the same strait where Captain Dumont d'Urville had
nearly miscarried. Then, pertinent to this:
"He was one of your great seamen," the captain told me,
"one of your shrewdest navigators, that d'Urville! He was
the Frenchman's Captain Cook. A man wise but unlucky!
Braving the ice banks of the South Pole, the coral of Oceania,
the cannibals of the Pacific, only to perish wretchedly in a train wreck!
If that energetic man was able to think about his life in its
last seconds, imagine what his final thoughts must have been!"
As he spoke, Captain Nemo seemed deeply moved, an emotion I felt
was to his credit.
Then, chart in hand, we returned to the deeds of the French navigator:
his voyages to circumnavigate the globe, his double attempt at
the South Pole, which led to his discovery of the Adélie Coast
and the Louis-Philippe Peninsula, finally his hydrographic surveys
of the chief islands in Oceania.
"What your d'Urville did on the surface of the sea," Captain Nemo
told me, "I've done in the ocean's interior, but more easily,
more completely than he. Constantly tossed about by hurricanes,
the Zealous and the new Astrolabe couldn't compare with the Nautilus,
a quiet work room truly at rest in the midst of the waters!"
"Even so, captain," I said, "there is one major similarity between
Dumont d'Urville's sloops of war and the Nautilus."
"What's that, sir?"
"Like them, the Nautilus has run aground!"
"The Nautilus is not aground, sir," Captain Nemo replied icily.
"The Nautilus was built to rest on the ocean floor, and I don't
need to undertake the arduous labors, the maneuvers d'Urville
had to attempt in order to float off his sloops of war.
The Zealous and the new Astrolabe wellnigh perished, but my Nautilus
is in no danger. Tomorrow, on the day stated and at the hour stated,
the tide will peacefully lift it off, and it will resume its navigating
through the seas."
"Captain," I said, "I don't doubt--"
"Tomorrow," Captain Nemo added, standing up, "tomorrow at
2:40 in the afternoon, the Nautilus will float off and exit
the Torres Strait undamaged."
Pronouncing these words in an extremely sharp tone, Captain Nemo gave
me a curt bow. This was my dismissal, and I reentered my stateroom.
144
There I found Conseil, who wanted to know the upshot of my interview
with the captain.
"My boy," I replied, "when I expressed the belief that these Papuan
natives were a threat to his Nautilus, the captain answered
me with great irony. So I've just one thing to say to you:
have faith in him and sleep in peace."
"Master has no need for my services?"
"No, my friend. What's Ned Land up to?"
"Begging master's indulgence," Conseil replied, "but our friend Ned
is concocting a kangaroo pie that will be the eighth wonder!"
I was left to myself; I went to bed but slept pretty poorly.
I kept hearing noises from the savages, who were stamping on
the platform and letting out deafening yells. The night passed
in this way, without the crew ever emerging from their usual inertia.
They were no more disturbed by the presence of these man-eaters
than soldiers in an armored fortress are troubled by ants running
over the armor plate.
I got up at six o'clock in the morning. The hatches weren't open.
So the air inside hadn't been renewed; but the air tanks were kept
full for any eventuality and would function appropriately to shoot
a few cubic meters of oxygen into the Nautilus's thin atmosphere.
I worked in my stateroom until noon without seeing Captain Nemo
even for an instant. Nobody on board seemed to be making any
preparations for departure.
I still waited for a while, then I made my way to the main lounge.
Its timepiece marked 2:30. In ten minutes the tide would reach its
maximum elevation, and if Captain Nemo hadn't made a rash promise,
the Nautilus would immediately break free. If not, many months
might pass before it could leave its coral bed.
But some preliminary vibrations could soon be felt over the boat's hull.
I heard its plating grind against the limestone roughness of
that coral base.
At 2:35 Captain Nemo appeared in the lounge.
"We're about to depart," he said.
"Ah!" I put in.
"I've given orders to open the hatches."
"What about the Papuans?"
"What about them?" Captain Nemo replied, with a light shrug
of his shoulders.
"Won't they come inside the Nautilus?"
145
"How will they manage that?"
"By jumping down the hatches you're about to open."
"Professor Aronnax," Captain Nemo replied serenely, "the Nautilus's
hatches aren't to be entered in that fashion even when they're open."
I gaped at the captain.
"You don't understand?" he said to me.
"Not in the least."
"Well, come along and you'll see!"
I headed to the central companionway. There, very puzzled,
Ned Land and Conseil watched the crewmen opening the hatches,
while a frightful clamor and furious shouts resounded outside.
The hatch lids fell back onto the outer plating.
Twenty horrible faces appeared. But when the first islander laid
hands on the companionway railing, he was flung backward by some
invisible power, lord knows what! He ran off, howling in terror
and wildly prancing around.
Ten of his companions followed him. All ten met the same fate.
Conseil was in ecstasy. Carried away by his violent instincts,
Ned Land leaped up the companionway. But as soon as his hands
seized the railing, he was thrown backward in his turn.
"Damnation!" he exclaimed. "I've been struck by a lightning bolt!"
These words explained everything to me. It wasn't just a railing
that led to the platform, it was a metal cable fully charged with
the ship's electricity. Anyone who touched it got a fearsome shock--
and such a shock would have been fatal if Captain Nemo had thrown
the full current from his equipment into this conducting cable!
It could honestly be said that he had stretched between himself and his
assailants a network of electricity no one could clear with impunity.
Meanwhile, crazed with terror, the unhinged Papuans beat a retreat.
As for us, half laughing, we massaged and comforted poor Ned Land,
who was swearing like one possessed.
But just then, lifted off by the tide's final undulations, the Nautilus
left its coral bed at exactly that fortieth minute pinpointed
by the captain. Its propeller churned the waves with lazy majesty.
Gathering speed little by little, the ship navigated on the surface
of the ocean, and safe and sound, it left behind the dangerous
narrows of the Torres Strait.
146
CHAPTER 23
"Aegri Somnia"*
*Latin: "troubled dreams." Ed.
THE FOLLOWING DAY, January 10, the Nautilus resumed its travels
in midwater but at a remarkable speed that I estimated to be at
least thirty-five miles per hour. The propeller was going so fast
I could neither follow nor count its revolutions.
I thought about how this marvelous electric force not only
gave motion, heat, and light to the Nautilus but even protected it
against outside attack, transforming it into a sacred ark no profane
hand could touch without being blasted; my wonderment was boundless,
and it went from the submersible itself to the engineer who
had created it.
We were traveling due west and on January 11 we doubled Cape Wessel,
located in longitude 135 degrees and latitude 10 degrees north,
the western tip of the Gulf of Carpentaria. Reefs were still
numerous but more widely scattered and were fixed on the chart
with the greatest accuracy. The Nautilus easily avoided
the Money breakers to port and the Victoria reefs to starboard,
positioned at longitude 130 degrees on the tenth parallel,
which we went along rigorously.
On January 13, arriving in the Timor Sea, Captain Nemo raised
the island of that name at longitude 122 degrees. This island,
whose surface area measures 1,625 square leagues, is governed by rajahs.
These aristocrats deem themselves the sons of crocodiles, in other words,
descendants with the most exalted origins to which a human
being can lay claim. Accordingly, their scaly ancestors infest
the island's rivers and are the subjects of special veneration.
They are sheltered, nurtured, flattered, pampered, and offered
a ritual diet of nubile maidens; and woe to the foreigner who lifts
a finger against these sacred saurians.
But the Nautilus wanted nothing to do with these nasty animals.
Timor Island was visible for barely an instant at noon while the chief
officer determined his position. I also caught only a glimpse
of little Roti Island, part of this same group, whose women have a
well-established reputation for beauty in the Malaysian marketplace.
After our position fix, the Nautilus's latitude bearings were modulated
to the southwest. Our prow pointed to the Indian Ocean. Where would
Captain Nemo's fancies take us? Would he head up to the shores
of Asia? Would he pull nearer to the beaches of Europe? Unlikely choices
for a man who avoided populated areas! So would he go down south?
Would he double the Cape of Good Hope, then Cape Horn, and push
on to the Antarctic pole? Finally, would he return to the seas
of the Pacific, where his Nautilus could navigate freely and easily?
Time would tell.
After cruising along the Cartier, Hibernia, Seringapatam, and Scott reefs,
the solid element's last exertions against the liquid element,
we were beyond all sight of shore by January 14. The Nautilus
slowed down in an odd manner, and very unpredictable in its ways,
it sometimes swam in the midst of the waters, sometimes drifted
147
on their surface.
During this phase of our voyage, Captain Nemo conducted interesting
experiments on the different temperatures in various strata of the sea.
Under ordinary conditions, such readings are obtained using
some pretty complicated instruments whose findings are dubious
to say the least, whether they're thermometric sounding lines,
whose glass often shatters under the water's pressure, or those devices
based on the varying resistance of metals to electric currents.
The results so obtained can't be adequately double-checked. By contrast,
Captain Nemo would seek the sea's temperature by going himself
into its depths, and when he placed his thermometer in contact
with the various layers of liquid, he found the sought-for degree
immediately and with certainty.
And so, by loading up its ballast tanks, or by sinking obliquely
with its slanting fins, the Nautilus successively reached
depths of 3,000, 4,000, 5,000, 7,000, 9,000, and 10,000 meters,
and the ultimate conclusion from these experiments was that,
in all latitudes, the sea had a permanent temperature of 4.5 degrees
centigrade at a depth of 1,000 meters.
I watched these experiments with the most intense fascination.
Captain Nemo brought a real passion to them. I often wondered
why he took these observations. Were they for the benefit
of his fellow man? It was unlikely, because sooner or later
his work would perish with him in some unknown sea!
Unless he intended the results of his experiments for me.
But that meant this strange voyage of mine would come to an end,
and no such end was in sight.
Be that as it may, Captain Nemo also introduced me to the different
data he had obtained on the relative densities of the water
in our globe's chief seas. From this news I derived some personal
enlightenment having nothing to do with science.
It happened the morning of January 15. The captain, with whom I
was strolling on the platform, asked me if I knew how salt water
differs in density from sea to sea. I said no, adding that there
was a lack of rigorous scientific observations on this subject.
"I've taken such observations," he told me, "and I can vouch
for their reliability."
"Fine," I replied, "but the Nautilus lives in a separate world,
and the secrets of its scientists don't make their way ashore."
"You're right, professor," he told me after a few moments of silence.
"This is a separate world. It's as alien to the earth as the planets
accompanying our globe around the sun, and we'll never become
familiar with the work of scientists on Saturn or Jupiter. But since
fate has linked our two lives, I can reveal the results of my
observations to you."
"I'm all attention, captain."
"You're aware, professor, that salt water is denser than fresh water,
but this density isn't uniform. In essence, if I represent
the density of fresh water by 1.000, then I find 1.028 for
the waters of the Atlantic, 1.026 for the waters of the Pacific,
148
1.030 for the waters of the Mediterranean--"
Aha, I thought, so he ventures into the Mediterranean?
"--1.018 for the waters of the Ionian Sea, and 1.029 for the waters
of the Adriatic."
Assuredly, the Nautilus didn't avoid the heavily traveled seas
of Europe, and from this insight I concluded that the ship would
take us back--perhaps very soon--to more civilized shores.
I expected Ned Land to greet this news with unfeigned satisfaction.
For several days our work hours were spent in all sorts of experiments,
on the degree of salinity in waters of different depths,
or on their electric properties, coloration, and transparency,
and in every instance Captain Nemo displayed an ingenuity equaled
only by his graciousness toward me. Then I saw no more of him
for some days and again lived on board in seclusion.
On January 16 the Nautilus seemed to have fallen asleep just a few meters
beneath the surface of the water. Its electric equipment had been
turned off, and the motionless propeller let it ride with the waves.
I assumed that the crew were busy with interior repairs,
required by the engine's strenuous mechanical action.
My companions and I then witnessed an unusual sight.
The panels in the lounge were open, and since the Nautilus's beacon
was off, a hazy darkness reigned in the midst of the waters.
Covered with heavy clouds, the stormy sky gave only the faintest
light to the ocean's upper strata.
I was observing the state of the sea under these conditions,
and even the largest fish were nothing more than ill-defined shadows,
when the Nautilus was suddenly transferred into broad daylight.
At first I thought the beacon had gone back on and was casting
its electric light into the liquid mass. I was mistaken,
and after a hasty examination I discovered my error.
The Nautilus had drifted into the midst of some phosphorescent
strata, which, in this darkness, came off as positively dazzling.
This effect was caused by myriads of tiny, luminous animals
whose brightness increased when they glided over the metal hull
of our submersible. In the midst of these luminous sheets of water,
I then glimpsed flashes of light, like those seen inside a blazing
furnace from streams of molten lead or from masses of metal
brought to a white heat--flashes so intense that certain areas
of the light became shadows by comparison, in a fiery setting
from which every shadow should seemingly have been banished.
No, this was no longer the calm emission of our usual lighting!
This light throbbed with unprecedented vigor and activity!
You sensed that it was alive!
In essence, it was a cluster of countless open-sea infusoria,
of noctiluca an eighth of an inch wide, actual globules of
transparent jelly equipped with a threadlike tentacle, up to 25,000
of which have been counted in thirty cubic centimeters of water.
And the power of their light was increased by those glimmers
unique to medusas, starfish, common jellyfish, angel-wing clams,
and other phosphorescent zoophytes, which were saturated with grease
from organic matter decomposed by the sea, and perhaps with mucus
149
secreted by fish.
For several hours the Nautilus drifted in this brilliant tide,
and our wonderment grew when we saw huge marine animals
cavorting in it, like the fire-dwelling salamanders of myth.
In the midst of these flames that didn't burn, I could see swift,
elegant porpoises, the tireless pranksters of the seas,
and sailfish three meters long, those shrewd heralds of hurricanes,
whose fearsome broadswords sometimes banged against the lounge window.
Then smaller fish appeared: miscellaneous triggerfish,
leather jacks, unicornfish, and a hundred others that left stripes
on this luminous atmosphere in their course.
Some magic lay behind this dazzling sight! Perhaps some
atmospheric condition had intensified this phenomenon?
Perhaps a storm had been unleashed on the surface of the waves?
But only a few meters down, the Nautilus felt no tempest's fury,
and the ship rocked peacefully in the midst of the calm waters.
And so it went, some new wonder constantly delighting us.
Conseil observed and classified his zoophytes, articulates, mollusks,
and fish. The days passed quickly, and I no longer kept track of them.
Ned, as usual, kept looking for changes of pace from our standard fare.
Like actual snails, we were at home in our shell, and I can vouch
that it's easy to turn into a full-fledged snail.
So this way of living began to seem simple and natural to us,
and we no longer envisioned a different lifestyle on the surface
of the planet earth, when something happened to remind us of
our strange circumstances.
On January 18 the Nautilus lay in longitude 105 degrees and latitude 15
degrees south. The weather was threatening, the sea rough and billowy.
The wind was blowing a strong gust from the east. The barometer,
which had been falling for some days, forecast an approaching
struggle of the elements.
I had climbed onto the platform just as the chief officer was taking
his readings of hour angles. Out of habit I waited for him to pronounce
his daily phrase. But that day it was replaced by a different phrase,
just as incomprehensible. Almost at once I saw Captain Nemo appear,
lift his spyglass, and inspect the horizon.
For some minutes the captain stood motionless, rooted to the spot
contained within the field of his lens. Then he lowered his
spyglass and exchanged about ten words with his chief officer.
The latter seemed to be in the grip of an excitement he tried in vain
to control. More in command of himself, Captain Nemo remained cool.
Furthermore, he seemed to be raising certain objections that his
chief officer kept answering with flat assurances. At least that's
what I gathered from their differences in tone and gesture.
As for me, I stared industriously in the direction under observation
but without spotting a thing. Sky and water merged into a perfectly
clean horizon line.
Meanwhile Captain Nemo strolled from one end of the platform
to the other, not glancing at me, perhaps not even seeing me.
His step was firm but less regular than usual. Sometimes he
would stop, cross his arms over his chest, and observe the sea.
150
What could he be looking for over that immense expanse?
By then the Nautilus lay hundreds of miles from the nearest coast!
The chief officer kept lifting his spyglass and stubbornly
examining the horizon, walking up and down, stamping his foot,
in his nervous agitation a sharp contrast to his superior.
But this mystery would inevitably be cleared up, and soon,
because Captain Nemo gave orders to increase speed; at once the engine
stepped up its drive power, setting the propeller in swifter rotation.
Just then the chief officer drew the captain's attention anew.
The latter interrupted his strolling and aimed his spyglass
at the point indicated. He observed it a good while.
As for me, deeply puzzled, I went below to the lounge and brought
back an excellent long-range telescope I habitually used.
Leaning my elbows on the beacon housing, which jutted from the stern
of the platform, I got set to scour that whole stretch of sky and sea.
But no sooner had I peered into the eyepiece than the instrument
was snatched from my hands.
I spun around. Captain Nemo was standing before me, but I almost
didn't recognize him. His facial features were transfigured.
Gleaming with dark fire, his eyes had shrunk beneath his frowning brow.
His teeth were half bared. His rigid body, clenched fists,
and head drawn between his shoulders, all attested to a fierce
hate breathing from every pore. He didn't move. My spyglass fell
from his hand and rolled at his feet.
Had I accidentally caused these symptoms of anger? Did this
incomprehensible individual think I had detected some secret
forbidden to guests on the Nautilus?
No! I wasn't the subject of his hate because he wasn't even looking
at me; his eyes stayed stubbornly focused on that inscrutable point
of the horizon.
Finally Captain Nemo regained his self-control. His facial appearance,
so profoundly changed, now resumed its usual calm. He addressed
a few words to his chief officer in their strange language,
then he turned to me:
"Professor Aronnax," he told me in a tone of some urgency, "I ask
that you now honor one of the binding agreements between us."
"Which one, captain?"
"You and your companions must be placed in confinement until I see
fit to set you free."
"You're in command," I answered, gaping at him. "But may I address
a question to you?"
"You may not, sir."
After that, I stopped objecting and started obeying,
since resistance was useless.
I went below to the cabin occupied by Ned Land and Conseil,
151
and I informed them of the captain's decision. I'll let the reader
decide how this news was received by the Canadian. In any case,
there was no time for explanations. Four crewmen were waiting
at the door, and they led us to the cell where we had spent our
first night aboard the Nautilus.
Ned Land tried to lodge a complaint, but the only answer he got
was a door shut in his face.
"Will master tell me what this means?" Conseil asked me.
I told my companions what had happened. They were as astonished
as I was, but no wiser.
Then I sank into deep speculation, and Captain Nemo's strange facial
seizure kept haunting me. I was incapable of connecting two ideas
in logical order, and I had strayed into the most absurd hypotheses,
when I was snapped out of my mental struggles by these words
from Ned Land:
"Well, look here! Lunch is served!"
Indeed, the table had been laid. Apparently Captain Nemo had given
this order at the same time he commanded the Nautilus to pick up speed.
"Will master allow me to make him a recommendation?"
Conseil asked me.
"Yes, my boy," I replied.
"Well, master needs to eat his lunch! It's prudent, because we
have no idea what the future holds."
"You're right, Conseil."
"Unfortunately," Ned Land said, "they've only given us the standard menu."
"Ned my friend," Conseil answered, "what would you say if they'd
given us no lunch at all?"
This dose of sanity cut the harpooner's complaints clean off.
We sat down at the table. Our meal proceeded pretty much in silence.
I ate very little. Conseil, everlastingly prudent, "force-fed" himself;
and despite the menu, Ned Land didn't waste a bite. Then, lunch over,
each of us propped himself in a corner.
Just then the luminous globe lighting our cell went out,
leaving us in profound darkness. Ned Land soon dozed off,
and to my astonishment, Conseil also fell into a heavy slumber.
I was wondering what could have caused this urgent need
for sleep, when I felt a dense torpor saturate my brain.
I tried to keep my eyes open, but they closed in spite of me.
I was in the grip of anguished hallucinations. Obviously some
sleep-inducing substance had been laced into the food we'd just eaten!
So imprisonment wasn't enough to conceal Captain Nemo's plans from us--
sleep was needed as well!
Then I heard the hatches close. The sea's undulations,
which had been creating a gentle rocking motion, now ceased.
152
Had the Nautilus left the surface of the ocean? Was it reentering
the motionless strata deep in the sea?
I tried to fight off this drowsiness. It was impossible.
My breathing grew weaker. I felt a mortal chill freeze
my dull, nearly paralyzed limbs. Like little domes of lead,
my lids fell over my eyes. I couldn't raise them.
A morbid sleep, full of hallucinations, seized my whole being.
Then the visions disappeared and left me in utter oblivion.
153
CHAPTER 24
The Coral Realm
THE NEXT DAY I woke up with my head unusually clear. Much to
my surprise, I was in my stateroom. No doubt my companions had been
put back in their cabin without noticing it any more than I had.
Like me, they would have no idea what took place during the night, and to
unravel this mystery I could count only on some future happenstance.
I then considered leaving my stateroom. Was I free or still a prisoner?
Perfectly free. I opened my door, headed down the gangways,
and climbed the central companionway. Hatches that had been closed
the day before were now open. I arrived on the platform.
Ned Land and Conseil were there waiting for me. I questioned them.
They knew nothing. Lost in a heavy sleep of which they had no memory,
they were quite startled to be back in their cabin.
As for the Nautilus, it seemed as tranquil and mysterious as ever.
It was cruising on the surface of the waves at a moderate speed.
Nothing seemed to have changed on board.
Ned Land observed the sea with his penetrating eyes. It was deserted.
The Canadian sighted nothing new on the horizon, neither sail nor shore.
A breeze was blowing noisily from the west, and disheveled by the wind,
long billows made the submersible roll very noticeably.
After renewing its air, the Nautilus stayed at an average depth
of fifteen meters, enabling it to return quickly to the surface
of the waves. And, contrary to custom, it executed such a maneuver
several times during that day of January 19. The chief officer
would then climb onto the platform, and his usual phrase would ring
through the ship's interior.
As for Captain Nemo, he didn't appear. Of the other men on board,
I saw only my emotionless steward, who served me with his
usual mute efficiency.
Near two o'clock I was busy organizing my notes in the lounge,
when the captain opened the door and appeared. I bowed to him.
He gave me an almost imperceptible bow in return, without saying a word
to me. I resumed my work, hoping he might give me some explanation
of the previous afternoon's events. He did nothing of the sort.
I stared at him. His face looked exhausted; his reddened eyes
hadn't been refreshed by sleep; his facial features expressed
profound sadness, real chagrin. He walked up and down,
sat and stood, picked up a book at random, discarded it immediately,
consulted his instruments without taking his customary notes,
and seemed unable to rest easy for an instant.
Finally he came over to me and said:
"Are you a physician, Professor Aronnax?"
This inquiry was so unexpected that I stared at him a good
154
while without replying.
"Are you a physician?" he repeated. "Several of your
scientific colleagues took their degrees in medicine,
such as Gratiolet, Moquin-Tandon, and others."
"That's right," I said, "I am a doctor, I used to be on call
at the hospitals. I was in practice for several years before
joining the museum."
"Excellent, sir."
My reply obviously pleased Captain Nemo. But not knowing what
he was driving at, I waited for further questions, ready to reply
as circumstances dictated.
"Professor Aronnax," the captain said to me, "would you consent
to give your medical attentions to one of my men?"
"Someone is sick?"
"Yes."
"I'm ready to go with you."
"Come."
I admit that my heart was pounding. Lord knows why, but I saw a definite
connection between this sick crewman and yesterday's happenings,
and the mystery of those events concerned me at least as much
as the man's sickness.
Captain Nemo led me to the Nautilus's stern and invited me into
a cabin located next to the sailors' quarters.
On a bed there lay a man some forty years old, with strongly
molded features, the very image of an Anglo-Saxon.
I bent over him. Not only was he sick, he was wounded.
Swathed in blood-soaked linen, his head was resting on a folded pillow.
I undid the linen bandages, while the wounded man gazed with great
staring eyes and let me proceed without making a single complaint.
It was a horrible wound. The cranium had been smashed open
by some blunt instrument, leaving the naked brains exposed,
and the cerebral matter had suffered deep abrasions. Blood clots had
formed in this dissolving mass, taking on the color of wine dregs.
Both contusion and concussion of the brain had occurred. The sick
man's breathing was labored, and muscle spasms quivered in his face.
Cerebral inflammation was complete and had brought on a paralysis
of movement and sensation.
I took the wounded man's pulse. It was intermittent.
The body's extremities were already growing cold, and I saw that death
was approaching without any possibility of my holding it in check.
After dressing the poor man's wound, I redid the linen bandages
around his head, and I turned to Captain Nemo.
"How did he get this wound?" I asked him.
155
"That's not important," the captain replied evasively.
"The Nautilus suffered a collision that cracked one of the engine levers,
and it struck this man. My chief officer was standing beside him.
This man leaped forward to intercept the blow. A brother lays down his
life for his brother, a friend for his friend, what could be simpler?
That's the law for everyone on board the Nautilus. But what's
your diagnosis of his condition?"
I hesitated to speak my mind.
"You may talk freely," the captain told me. "This man
doesn't understand French."
I took a last look at the wounded man, then I replied:
"This man will be dead in two hours."
"Nothing can save him?"
"Nothing."
Captain Nemo clenched his fists, and tears slid from his eyes,
which I had thought incapable of weeping.
For a few moments more I observed the dying man, whose life was
ebbing little by little. He grew still more pale under the electric
light that bathed his deathbed. I looked at his intelligent head,
furrowed with premature wrinkles that misfortune, perhaps misery,
had etched long before. I was hoping to detect the secret of his
life in the last words that might escape from his lips!
"You may go, Professor Aronnax," Captain Nemo told me.
I left the captain in the dying man's cabin and I repaired
to my stateroom, very moved by this scene. All day long I was
aquiver with gruesome forebodings. That night I slept poorly,
and between my fitful dreams, I thought I heard a distant moaning,
like a funeral dirge. Was it a prayer for the dead, murmured in
that language I couldn't understand?
The next morning I climbed on deck. Captain Nemo was already there.
As soon as he saw me, he came over.
"Professor," he said to me, "would it be convenient for you to make
an underwater excursion today?"
"With my companions?" I asked.
"If they're agreeable."
"We're yours to command, captain."
"Then kindly put on your diving suits."
As for the dead or dying man, he hadn't come into the picture. I rejoined
Ned Land and Conseil. I informed them of Captain Nemo's proposition.
Conseil was eager to accept, and this time the Canadian proved
perfectly amenable to going with us.
It was eight o'clock in the morning. By 8:30 we were suited up for this
156
new stroll and equipped with our two devices for lighting and breathing.
The double door opened, and accompanied by Captain Nemo with a dozen
crewmen following, we set foot on the firm seafloor where the Nautilus
was resting, ten meters down.
A gentle slope gravitated to an uneven bottom whose depth was
about fifteen fathoms. This bottom was completely different
from the one I had visited during my first excursion under
the waters of the Pacific Ocean. Here I saw no fine-grained sand,
no underwater prairies, not one open-sea forest. I immediately recognized
the wondrous region in which Captain Nemo did the honors that day.
It was the coral realm.
In the zoophyte branch, class Alcyonaria, one finds the order Gorgonaria,
which contains three groups: sea fans, isidian polyps, and coral polyps.
It's in this last that precious coral belongs, an unusual substance that,
at different times, has been classified in the mineral, vegetable,
and animal kingdoms. Medicine to the ancients, jewelry to the moderns,
it wasn't decisively placed in the animal kingdom until 1694,
by Peysonnel of Marseilles.
A coral is a unit of tiny animals assembled over a polypary
that's brittle and stony in nature. These polyps have a unique
generating mechanism that reproduces them via the budding process,
and they have an individual existence while also participating
in a communal life. Hence they embody a sort of natural socialism.
I was familiar with the latest research on this bizarre zoophyte--
which turns to stone while taking on a tree form, as some naturalists
have very aptly observed--and nothing could have been more fascinating
to me than to visit one of these petrified forests that nature has
planted on the bottom of the sea.
We turned on our Ruhmkorff devices and went along a coral shoal
in the process of forming, which, given time, will someday close
off this whole part of the Indian Ocean. Our path was bordered
by hopelessly tangled bushes, formed from snarls of shrubs
all covered with little star-shaped, white-streaked flowers.
Only, contrary to plants on shore, these tree forms become attached
to rocks on the seafloor by heading from top to bottom.
Our lights produced a thousand delightful effects while playing over
these brightly colored boughs. I fancied I saw these cylindrical,
membrane-filled tubes trembling beneath the water's undulations.
I was tempted to gather their fresh petals, which were adorned with
delicate tentacles, some newly in bloom, others barely opened, while
nimble fish with fluttering fins brushed past them like flocks of birds.
But if my hands came near the moving flowers of these sensitive,
lively creatures, an alarm would instantly sound throughout the colony.
The white petals retracted into their red sheaths, the flowers vanished
before my eyes, and the bush changed into a chunk of stony nipples.
Sheer chance had placed me in the presence of the most valuable
specimens of this zoophyte. This coral was the equal of those fished
up from the Mediterranean off the Barbary Coast or the shores
of France and Italy. With its bright colors, it lived up to those
poetic names of blood flower and blood foam that the industry
confers on its finest exhibits. Coral sells for as much as 500
francs per kilogram, and in this locality the liquid strata hid
enough to make the fortunes of a whole host of coral fishermen.
This valuable substance often merges with other polyparies,
157
forming compact, hopelessly tangled units known as "macciota,"
and I noted some wonderful pink samples of this coral.
But as the bushes shrank, the tree forms magnified.
Actual petrified thickets and long alcoves from some fantastic
school of architecture kept opening up before our steps.
Captain Nemo entered beneath a dark gallery whose gentle slope
took us to a depth of 100 meters. The light from our glass coils
produced magical effects at times, lingering on the wrinkled roughness
of some natural arch, or some overhang suspended like a chandelier,
which our lamps flecked with fiery sparks. Amid these shrubs
of precious coral, I observed other polyps no less unusual:
melita coral, rainbow coral with jointed outgrowths, then a few
tufts of genus Corallina, some green and others red, actually a type
of seaweed encrusted with limestone salts, which, after long disputes,
naturalists have finally placed in the vegetable kingdom.
But as one intellectual has remarked, "Here, perhaps, is the actual
point where life rises humbly out of slumbering stone, but without
breaking away from its crude starting point."
Finally, after two hours of walking, we reached a depth of about
300 meters, in other words, the lowermost limit at which coral
can begin to form. But here it was no longer some isolated bush
or a modest grove of low timber. It was an immense forest,
huge mineral vegetation, enormous petrified trees linked by garlands
of elegant hydras from the genus Plumularia, those tropical
creepers of the sea, all decked out in shades and gleams.
We passed freely under their lofty boughs, lost up in the shadows
of the waves, while at our feet organ-pipe coral, stony coral,
star coral, fungus coral, and sea anemone from the genus Caryophylia
formed a carpet of flowers all strewn with dazzling gems.
What an indescribable sight! Oh, if only we could share our feelings!
Why were we imprisoned behind these masks of metal and glass!
Why were we forbidden to talk with each other! At least let us
lead the lives of the fish that populate this liquid element,
or better yet, the lives of amphibians, which can spend long hours
either at sea or on shore, traveling through their double domain
as their whims dictate!
Meanwhile Captain Nemo had called a halt. My companions and I
stopped walking, and turning around, I saw the crewmen form
a semicircle around their leader. Looking with greater care,
I observed that four of them were carrying on their shoulders
an object that was oblong in shape.
At this locality we stood in the center of a huge clearing
surrounded by the tall tree forms of this underwater forest.
Our lamps cast a sort of brilliant twilight over the area,
making inordinately long shadows on the seafloor. Past the boundaries
of the clearing, the darkness deepened again, relieved only by little
sparkles given off by the sharp crests of coral.
Ned Land and Conseil stood next to me. We stared, and it
dawned on me that I was about to witness a strange scene.
Observing the seafloor, I saw that it swelled at certain points from
low bulges that were encrusted with limestone deposits and arranged
with a symmetry that betrayed the hand of man.
In the middle of the clearing, on a pedestal of roughly piled rocks,
158
there stood a cross of coral, extending long arms you would have
thought were made of petrified blood.
At a signal from Captain Nemo, one of his men stepped forward and,
a few feet from this cross, detached a mattock from his belt
and began to dig a hole.
I finally understood! This clearing was a cemetery, this hole a grave,
that oblong object the body of the man who must have died during
the night! Captain Nemo and his men had come to bury their companion
in this communal resting place on the inaccessible ocean floor!
No! My mind was reeling as never before! Never had ideas of such impact
raced through my brain! I didn't want to see what my eyes saw!
Meanwhile the grave digging went slowly. Fish fled here and
there as their retreat was disturbed. I heard the pick ringing
on the limestone soil, its iron tip sometimes giving off sparks
when it hit a stray piece of flint on the sea bottom. The hole
grew longer, wider, and soon was deep enough to receive the body.
Then the pallbearers approached. Wrapped in white fabric made from
filaments of the fan mussel, the body was lowered into its watery grave.
Captain Nemo, arms crossed over his chest, knelt in a posture
of prayer, as did all the friends of him who had loved them. . . .
My two companions and I bowed reverently.
The grave was then covered over with the rubble dug from the seafloor,
and it formed a low mound.
When this was done, Captain Nemo and his men stood up; then they
all approached the grave, sank again on bended knee, and extended
their hands in a sign of final farewell. . . .
Then the funeral party went back up the path to the Nautilus,
returning beneath the arches of the forest, through the thickets,
along the coral bushes, going steadily higher.
Finally the ship's rays appeared. Their luminous trail guided us
to the Nautilus. By one o'clock we had returned.
After changing clothes, I climbed onto the platform, and in the grip
of dreadfully obsessive thoughts, I sat next to the beacon.
Captain Nemo rejoined me. I stood up and said to him:
"So, as I predicted, that man died during the night?"
"Yes, Professor Aronnax," Captain Nemo replied.
"And now he rests beside his companions in that coral cemetery?"
"Yes, forgotten by the world but not by us! We dig the graves,
then entrust the polyps with sealing away our dead for eternity!"
And with a sudden gesture, the captain hid his face in his clenched fists,
vainly trying to hold back a sob. Then he added:
"There lies our peaceful cemetery, hundreds of feet beneath
the surface of the waves!"
159
"At least, captain, your dead can sleep serenely there, out of
the reach of sharks!"
"Yes, sir," Captain Nemo replied solemnly, "of sharks and men!"
END OF THE FIRST PART
160
 *Author's Note: About 106 meters. An English foot is only 30.4 centimeters.
 *German: "Bulletin." Ed.
 *Author's Note: A pier is a type of wharf expressly set aside for an individual vessel.
 *Author's Note: Tenders are small steamboats that assist the big liners.
 *Author's Note: A Bowie knife is a wide-bladed dagger that Americans are forever carrying
around.
 *Author's Note: A steward is a waiter on board a steamer.
 *Latin: nemo means "no one." Ed.
 *Latin: "in a class by itself." Ed.
 **Author's Note: And sure enough, there's now talk of such a discovery, in which a new set of
levers generates
considerable power. Did its inventor meet up with Captain Nemo?
 *Author's Note: "Ladyfingers" are small, thin, white clouds with ragged edges.
 *Latin: a spigot "just for that purpose." Ed.
 *Latin: "troubled dreams." Ed.
161
SECOND PART
______________________________________________________________
CHAPTER 1
The Indian Ocean
NOW WE BEGIN the second part of this voyage under the seas.
The first ended in that moving scene at the coral cemetery,
which left a profound impression on my mind. And so Captain Nemo
would live out his life entirely in the heart of this immense sea,
and even his grave lay ready in its impenetrable depths.
There the last sleep of the Nautilus's occupants, friends bound together
in death as in life, would be disturbed by no monster of the deep!
"No man either!" the captain had added.
Always that same fierce, implacable defiance of human society!
As for me, I was no longer content with the hypotheses
that satisfied Conseil. That fine lad persisted in seeing
the Nautilus's commander as merely one of those unappreciated
scientists who repay humanity's indifference with contempt.
For Conseil, the captain was still a misunderstood genius who,
tired of the world's deceptions, had been driven to take refuge in this
inaccessible environment where he was free to follow his instincts.
But to my mind, this hypothesis explained only one side of Captain Nemo.
In fact, the mystery of that last afternoon when we were locked in
prison and put to sleep, the captain's violent precaution of snatching
from my grasp a spyglass poised to scour the horizon, and the fatal
wound given that man during some unexplained collision suffered
by the Nautilus, all led me down a plain trail. No! Captain Nemo
wasn't content simply to avoid humanity! His fearsome submersible
served not only his quest for freedom, but also, perhaps, it was
used in lord-knows-what schemes of dreadful revenge.
Right now, nothing is clear to me, I still glimpse only glimmers
in the dark, and I must limit my pen, as it were, to taking
dictation from events.
But nothing binds us to Captain Nemo. He believes that escaping from
the Nautilus is impossible. We are not even constrained by our word
of honor. No promises fetter us. We're simply captives, prisoners
masquerading under the name "guests" for the sake of everyday courtesy.
Even so, Ned Land hasn't given up all hope of recovering his freedom.
He's sure to take advantage of the first chance that comes his way.
No doubt I will do likewise. And yet I will feel some regret at making
off with the Nautilus's secrets, so generously unveiled for us by
Captain Nemo! Because, ultimately, should we detest or admire this man?
162
Is he the persecutor or the persecuted? And in all honesty,
before I leave him forever, I want to finish this underwater
tour of the world, whose first stages have been so magnificent.
I want to observe the full series of these wonders gathered under
the seas of our globe. I want to see what no man has seen yet,
even if I must pay for this insatiable curiosity with my life!
What are my discoveries to date? Nothing, relatively speaking--
since so far we've covered only 6,000 leagues across the Pacific!
Nevertheless, I'm well aware that the Nautilus is drawing near
to populated shores, and if some chance for salvation becomes
available to us, it would be sheer cruelty to sacrifice my
companions to my passion for the unknown. I must go with them,
perhaps even guide them. But will this opportunity ever arise?
The human being, robbed of his free will, craves such an opportunity;
but the scientist, forever inquisitive, dreads it.
That day, January 21, 1868, the chief officer went at noon to take
the sun's altitude. I climbed onto the platform, lit a cigar,
and watched him at work. It seemed obvious to me that this man didn't
understand French, because I made several remarks in a loud voice
that were bound to provoke him to some involuntary show of interest
had he understood them; but he remained mute and emotionless.
While he took his sights with his sextant, one of the Nautilus's sailors--
that muscular man who had gone with us to Crespo Island during our first
underwater excursion--came up to clean the glass panes of the beacon.
I then examined the fittings of this mechanism, whose power was
increased a hundredfold by biconvex lenses that were designed
like those in a lighthouse and kept its rays productively focused.
This electric lamp was so constructed as to yield its maximum
illuminating power. In essence, its light was generated in a vacuum,
insuring both its steadiness and intensity. Such a vacuum also reduced
wear on the graphite points between which the luminous arc expanded.
This was an important savings for Captain Nemo, who couldn't
easily renew them. But under these conditions, wear and tear
were almost nonexistent.
When the Nautilus was ready to resume its underwater travels,
I went below again to the lounge. The hatches closed once more,
and our course was set due west.
We then plowed the waves of the Indian Ocean, vast liquid plains
with an area of 550,000,000 hectares, whose waters are so transparent
it makes you dizzy to lean over their surface. There the Nautilus
generally drifted at a depth between 100 and 200 meters.
It behaved in this way for some days. To anyone without my grand
passion for the sea, these hours would surely have seemed long
and monotonous; but my daily strolls on the platform where I was
revived by the life-giving ocean air, the sights in the rich waters
beyond the lounge windows, the books to be read in the library,
and the composition of my memoirs, took up all my time and left me
without a moment of weariness or boredom.
All in all, we enjoyed a highly satisfactory state of health.
The diet on board agreed with us perfectly, and for my part,
I could easily have gone without those changes of pace that Ned Land,
in a spirit of protest, kept taxing his ingenuity to supply us.
What's more, in this constant temperature we didn't even have to
worry about catching colds. Besides, the ship had a good stock of
163
the madrepore Dendrophylia, known in Provence by the name sea fennel,
and a poultice made from the dissolved flesh of its polyps will
furnish an excellent cough medicine.
For some days we saw a large number of aquatic birds with webbed feet,
known as gulls or sea mews. Some were skillfully slain, and when cooked
in a certain fashion, they make a very acceptable platter of water game.
Among the great wind riders--carried over long distances from every
shore and resting on the waves from their exhausting flights--
I spotted some magnificent albatross, birds belonging to the Longipennes
(long-winged) family, whose discordant calls sound like the braying
of an ass. The Totipalmes (fully webbed) family was represented
by swift frigate birds, nimbly catching fish at the surface,
and by numerous tropic birds of the genus Phaeton, among others
the red-tailed tropic bird, the size of a pigeon, its white plumage
shaded with pink tints that contrasted with its dark-hued wings.
The Nautilus's nets hauled up several types of sea turtle from
the hawksbill genus with arching backs whose scales are highly prized.
Diving easily, these reptiles can remain a good while underwater
by closing the fleshy valves located at the external openings of their
nasal passages. When they were captured, some hawksbills were still
asleep inside their carapaces, a refuge from other marine animals.
The flesh of these turtles was nothing memorable, but their eggs
made an excellent feast.
As for fish, they always filled us with wonderment when, staring through
the open panels, we could unveil the secrets of their aquatic lives.
I noted several species I hadn't previously been able to observe.
I'll mention chiefly some trunkfish unique to the Red Sea, the sea
of the East Indies, and that part of the ocean washing the coasts
of equinoctial America. Like turtles, armadillos, sea urchins,
and crustaceans, these fish are protected by armor plate that's
neither chalky nor stony but actual bone. Sometimes this armor takes
the shape of a solid triangle, sometimes that of a solid quadrangle.
Among the triangular type, I noticed some half a decimeter long,
with brown tails, yellow fins, and wholesome, exquisitely tasty flesh;
I even recommend that they be acclimatized to fresh water, a change,
incidentally, that a number of saltwater fish can make with ease.
I'll also mention some quadrangular trunkfish topped by four large
protuberances along the back; trunkfish sprinkled with white spots on
the underside of the body, which make good house pets like certain birds;
boxfish armed with stings formed by extensions of their bony crusts,
and whose odd grunting has earned them the nickname "sea pigs";
then some trunkfish known as dromedaries, with tough, leathery flesh
and big conical humps.
From the daily notes kept by Mr. Conseil, I also retrieve
certain fish from the genus Tetradon unique to these seas:
southern puffers with red backs and white chests distinguished by
three lengthwise rows of filaments, and jugfish, seven inches long,
decked out in the brightest colors. Then, as specimens of other genera,
blowfish resembling a dark brown egg, furrowed with white bands,
and lacking tails; globefish, genuine porcupines of the sea,
armed with stings and able to inflate themselves until they look
like a pin cushion bristling with needles; seahorses common to
every ocean; flying dragonfish with long snouts and highly distended
pectoral fins shaped like wings, which enable them, if not to fly,
at least to spring into the air; spatula-shaped paddlefish whose
164
tails are covered with many scaly rings; snipefish with long jaws,
excellent animals twenty-five centimeters long and gleaming with
the most cheerful colors; bluish gray dragonets with wrinkled heads;
myriads of leaping blennies with black stripes and long pectoral fins,
gliding over the surface of the water with prodigious speed;
delicious sailfish that can hoist their fins in a favorable current
like so many unfurled sails; splendid nurseryfish on which nature
has lavished yellow, azure, silver, and gold; yellow mackerel
with wings made of filaments; bullheads forever spattered with mud,
which make distinct hissing sounds; sea robins whose livers are thought
to be poisonous; ladyfish that can flutter their eyelids; finally,
archerfish with long, tubular snouts, real oceangoing flycatchers,
armed with a rifle unforeseen by either Remington or Chassepot:
it slays insects by shooting them with a simple drop of water.
From the eighty-ninth fish genus in Lacépède's system of classification,
belonging to his second subclass of bony fish (characterized by gill
covers and a bronchial membrane), I noted some scorpionfish whose
heads are adorned with stings and which have only one dorsal fin;
these animals are covered with small scales, or have none at all,
depending on the subgenus to which they belong. The second subgenus
gave us some Didactylus specimens three to four decimeters long,
streaked with yellow, their heads having a phantasmagoric appearance.
As for the first subgenus, it furnished several specimens of that
bizarre fish aptly nicknamed "toadfish," whose big head is sometimes
gouged with deep cavities, sometimes swollen with protuberances;
bristling with stings and strewn with nodules, it sports hideously
irregular horns; its body and tail are adorned with callosities;
its stings can inflict dangerous injuries; it's repulsive and horrible.
From January 21 to the 23rd, the Nautilus traveled at the rate of 250
leagues in twenty-four hours, hence 540 miles at twenty-two miles
per hour. If, during our trip, we were able to identify these different
varieties of fish, it's because they were attracted by our electric
light and tried to follow alongside; but most of them were outdistanced
by our speed and soon fell behind; temporarily, however, a few
managed to keep pace in the Nautilus's waters.
On the morning of the 24th, in latitude 12 degrees 5'
south and longitude 94 degrees 33', we raised Keeling Island,
a madreporic upheaving planted with magnificent coconut trees,
which had been visited by Mr. Darwin and Captain Fitzroy. The Nautilus
cruised along a short distance off the shore of this desert island.
Our dragnets brought up many specimens of polyps and echinoderms
plus some unusual shells from the branch Mollusca. Captain Nemo's
treasures were enhanced by some valuable exhibits from the delphinula
snail species, to which I joined some pointed star coral, a sort
of parasitic polypary that often attaches itself to seashells.
Soon Keeling Island disappeared below the horizon, and our course
was set to the northwest, toward the tip of the Indian peninsula.
"Civilization!" Ned Land told me that day. "Much better than
those Papuan Islands where we ran into more savages than venison!
On this Indian shore, professor, there are roads and railways,
English, French, and Hindu villages. We wouldn't go five miles
without bumping into a fellow countryman. Come on now, isn't it
time for our sudden departure from Captain Nemo?"
"No, no, Ned," I replied in a very firm tone. "Let's ride it out,
165
as you seafaring fellows say. The Nautilus is approaching
populated areas. It's going back toward Europe, let it take us there.
After we arrive in home waters, we can do as we see fit.
Besides, I don't imagine Captain Nemo will let us go hunting
on the coasts of Malabar or Coromandel as he did in the forests
of New Guinea."
"Well, sir, can't we manage without his permission?"
I didn't answer the Canadian. I wanted no arguments. Deep down,
I was determined to fully exploit the good fortune that had put me
on board the Nautilus.
After leaving Keeling Island, our pace got generally slower.
It also got more unpredictable, often taking us to great depths.
Several times we used our slanting fins, which internal levers could
set at an oblique angle to our waterline. Thus we went as deep
as two or three kilometers down but without ever verifying the lowest
depths of this sea near India, which soundings of 13,000 meters have
been unable to reach. As for the temperature in these lower strata,
the thermometer always and invariably indicated 4 degrees centigrade.
I merely observed that in the upper layers, the water was always
colder over shallows than in the open sea.
On January 25, the ocean being completely deserted, the Nautilus spent
the day on the surface, churning the waves with its powerful propeller
and making them spurt to great heights. Under these conditions,
who wouldn't have mistaken it for a gigantic cetacean? I spent
three-quarters of the day on the platform. I stared at the sea.
Nothing on the horizon, except near four o'clock in the afternoon
a long steamer to the west, running on our opposite tack.
Its masting was visible for an instant, but it couldn't have
seen the Nautilus because we were lying too low in the water.
I imagine that steamboat belonged to the Peninsular & Oriental line,
which provides service from the island of Ceylon to Sidney,
also calling at King George Sound and Melbourne.
At five o'clock in the afternoon, just before that brief twilight
that links day with night in tropical zones, Conseil and I marveled
at an unusual sight.
It was a delightful animal whose discovery, according to the ancients,
is a sign of good luck. Aristotle, Athenaeus, Pliny, and Oppian
studied its habits and lavished on its behalf all the scientific poetry
of Greece and Italy. They called it "nautilus" and "pompilius."
But modern science has not endorsed these designations, and this
mollusk is now known by the name argonaut.
Anyone consulting Conseil would soon learn from the gallant lad
that the branch Mollusca is divided into five classes; that the first
class features the Cephalopoda (whose members are sometimes naked,
sometimes covered with a shell), which consists of two families,
the Dibranchiata and the Tetrabranchiata, which are distinguished
by their number of gills; that the family Dibranchiata includes
three genera, the argonaut, the squid, and the cuttlefish, and that
the family Tetrabranchiata contains only one genus, the nautilus.
After this catalog, if some recalcitrant listener confuses
the argonaut, which is acetabuliferous (in other words, a bearer
of suction tubes), with the nautilus, which is tentaculiferous
(a bearer of tentacles), it will be simply unforgivable.
166
Now, it was a school of argonauts then voyaging on the surface
of the ocean. We could count several hundred of them.
They belonged to that species of argonaut covered with protuberances
and exclusive to the seas near India.
These graceful mollusks were swimming backward by means of their
locomotive tubes, sucking water into these tubes and then expelling it.
Six of their eight tentacles were long, thin, and floated
on the water, while the other two were rounded into palms
and spread to the wind like light sails. I could see perfectly
their undulating, spiral-shaped shells, which Cuvier aptly
compared to an elegant cockleboat. It's an actual boat indeed.
It transports the animal that secretes it without the animal
sticking to it.
"The argonaut is free to leave its shell," I told Conseil,
"but it never does."
"Not unlike Captain Nemo," Conseil replied sagely. "Which is why
he should have christened his ship the Argonaut."
For about an hour the Nautilus cruised in the midst of this school
of mollusks. Then, lord knows why, they were gripped with a sudden fear.
As if at a signal, every sail was abruptly lowered; arms folded,
bodies contracted, shells turned over by changing their center
of gravity, and the whole flotilla disappeared under the waves.
It was instantaneous, and no squadron of ships ever maneuvered
with greater togetherness.
Just then night fell suddenly, and the waves barely surged in the breeze,
spreading placidly around the Nautilus's side plates.
The next day, January 26, we cut the equator on the 82nd meridian
and we reentered the northern hemisphere.
During that day a fearsome school of sharks provided us with an escort.
Dreadful animals that teem in these seas and make them
extremely dangerous. There were Port Jackson sharks with a brown back,
a whitish belly, and eleven rows of teeth, bigeye sharks with necks
marked by a large black spot encircled in white and resembling an eye,
and Isabella sharks whose rounded snouts were strewn with dark speckles.
Often these powerful animals rushed at the lounge window with a
violence less than comforting. By this point Ned Land had lost
all self-control. He wanted to rise to the surface of the waves
and harpoon the monsters, especially certain smooth-hound sharks whose
mouths were paved with teeth arranged like a mosaic, and some big
five-meter tiger sharks that insisted on personally provoking him.
But the Nautilus soon picked up speed and easily left astern
the fastest of these man-eaters.
On January 27, at the entrance to the huge Bay of Bengal,
we repeatedly encountered a gruesome sight: human corpses floating
on the surface of the waves! Carried by the Ganges to the high seas,
these were deceased Indian villagers who hadn't been fully devoured
by vultures, the only morticians in these parts. But there was no
shortage of sharks to assist them with their undertaking chores.
Near seven o'clock in the evening, the Nautilus lay
half submerged, navigating in the midst of milky white waves.
167
As far as the eye could see, the ocean seemed lactified.
Was it an effect of the moon's rays? No, because the new moon was barely
two days old and was still lost below the horizon in the sun's rays.
The entire sky, although lit up by stellar radiation, seemed pitch-black
in comparison with the whiteness of these waters.
Conseil couldn't believe his eyes, and he questioned me about
the causes of this odd phenomenon. Luckily I was in a position
to answer him.
"That's called a milk sea," I told him, "a vast expanse of white waves
often seen along the coasts of Amboina and in these waterways."
"But," Conseil asked, "could master tell me the cause of this effect,
because I presume this water hasn't really changed into milk!"
"No, my boy, and this whiteness that amazes you is merely due
to the presence of myriads of tiny creatures called infusoria,
a sort of diminutive glowworm that's colorless and gelatinous
in appearance, as thick as a strand of hair, and no longer than
one-fifth of a millimeter. Some of these tiny creatures stick
together over an area of several leagues."
"Several leagues!" Conseil exclaimed.
"Yes, my boy, and don't even try to compute the number of
these infusoria. You won't pull it off, because if I'm not mistaken,
certain navigators have cruised through milk seas for more
than forty miles."
I'm not sure that Conseil heeded my recommendation, because he seemed
to be deep in thought, no doubt trying to calculate how many
one-fifths of a millimeter are found in forty square miles.
As for me, I continued to observe this phenomenon. For several
hours the Nautilus's spur sliced through these whitish waves,
and I watched it glide noiselessly over this soapy water, as if it
were cruising through those foaming eddies that a bay's currents
and countercurrents sometimes leave between each other.
Near midnight the sea suddenly resumed its usual hue, but behind us
all the way to the horizon, the skies kept mirroring the whiteness
of those waves and for a good while seemed imbued with the hazy
glow of an aurora borealis.
168
CHAPTER 2
A New Proposition from Captain Nemo
ON JANUARY 28, in latitude 9 degrees 4' north, when the Nautilus returned
at noon to the surface of the sea, it lay in sight of land some eight
miles to the west. Right off, I observed a cluster of mountains
about 2,000 feet high, whose shapes were very whimsically sculpted.
After our position fix, I reentered the lounge, and when our bearings
were reported on the chart, I saw that we were off the island of Ceylon,
that pearl dangling from the lower lobe of the Indian peninsula.
I went looking in the library for a book about this island, one of
the most fertile in the world. Sure enough, I found a volume entitled
Ceylon and the Singhalese by H. C. Sirr, Esq. Reentering the lounge,
I first noted the bearings of Ceylon, on which antiquity lavished
so many different names. It was located between latitude 5 degrees 55'
and 9 degrees 49' north, and between longitude 79 degrees 42'
and 82 degrees 4' east of the meridian of Greenwich; its length
is 275 miles; its maximum width, 150 miles; its circumference,
900 miles; its surface area, 24,448 square miles, in other words,
a little smaller than that of Ireland.
Just then Captain Nemo and his chief officer appeared.
The captain glanced at the chart. Then, turning to me:
"The island of Ceylon," he said, "is famous for its pearl fisheries.
Would you be interested, Professor Aronnax, in visiting one
of those fisheries?"
"Certainly, captain."
"Fine. It's easily done. Only, when we see the fisheries,
we'll see no fishermen. The annual harvest hasn't yet begun.
No matter. I'll give orders to make for the Gulf of Mannar,
and we'll arrive there late tonight."
The captain said a few words to his chief officer who went
out immediately. Soon the Nautilus reentered its liquid element,
and the pressure gauge indicated that it was staying at a depth
of thirty feet.
With the chart under my eyes, I looked for the Gulf of Mannar. I found
it by the 9th parallel off the northwestern shores of Ceylon. It was
formed by the long curve of little Mannar Island. To reach it we
had to go all the way up Ceylon's west coast.
"Professor," Captain Nemo then told me, "there are pearl fisheries
in the Bay of Bengal, the seas of the East Indies, the seas
of China and Japan, plus those seas south of the United States,
the Gulf of Panama and the Gulf of California; but it's off Ceylon
that such fishing reaps its richest rewards. No doubt we'll be
arriving a little early. Fishermen gather in the Gulf of Mannar
only during the month of March, and for thirty days some 300 boats
concentrate on the lucrative harvest of these treasures from the sea.
Each boat is manned by ten oarsmen and ten fishermen.
The latter divide into two groups, dive in rotation, and descend
to a depth of twelve meters with the help of a heavy stone clutched
between their feet and attached by a rope to their boat."
169
"You mean," I said, "that such primitive methods are still all
that they use?"
"All," Captain Nemo answered me, "although these fisheries belong
to the most industrialized people in the world, the English,
to whom the Treaty of Amiens granted them in 1802."
"Yet it strikes me that diving suits like yours could perform yeoman
service in such work."
"Yes, since those poor fishermen can't stay long underwater.
On his voyage to Ceylon, the Englishman Percival made much of a Kaffir
who stayed under five minutes without coming up to the surface,
but I find that hard to believe. I know that some divers can last up
to fifty-seven seconds, and highly skillful ones to eighty-seven;
but such men are rare, and when the poor fellows climb back on board,
the water coming out of their noses and ears is tinted with blood.
I believe the average time underwater that these fishermen can
tolerate is thirty seconds, during which they hastily stuff
their little nets with all the pearl oysters they can tear loose.
But these fishermen generally don't live to advanced age:
their vision weakens, ulcers break out on their eyes, sores form
on their bodies, and some are even stricken with apoplexy on
the ocean floor."
"Yes," I said, "it's a sad occupation, and one that exists only
to gratify the whims of fashion. But tell me, captain, how many
oysters can a boat fish up in a workday?"
"About 40,000 to 50,000. It's even said that in 1814, when the English
government went fishing on its own behalf, its divers worked just
twenty days and brought up 76,000,000 oysters."
"At least," I asked, "the fishermen are well paid, aren't they?"
"Hardly, professor. In Panama they make just $1.00 per week.
In most places they earn only a penny for each oyster that has a pearl,
and they bring up so many that have none!"
"Only one penny to those poor people who make their employers rich!
That's atrocious!"
"On that note, professor," Captain Nemo told me, "you and your
companions will visit the Mannar oysterbank, and if by chance some
eager fisherman arrives early, well, we can watch him at work."
"That suits me, captain."
"By the way, Professor Aronnax, you aren't afraid of sharks, are you?"
"Sharks?" I exclaimed.
This struck me as a pretty needless question, to say the least.
"Well?" Captain Nemo went on.
"I admit, captain, I'm not yet on very familiar terms with that
genus of fish."
170
"We're used to them, the rest of us," Captain Nemo answered.
"And in time you will be too. Anyhow, we'll be armed, and on our
way we might hunt a man-eater or two. It's a fascinating sport.
So, professor, I'll see you tomorrow, bright and early."
This said in a carefree tone, Captain Nemo left the lounge.
If you're invited to hunt bears in the Swiss mountains, you might say:
"Oh good, I get to go bear hunting tomorrow!" If you're invited
to hunt lions on the Atlas plains or tigers in the jungles of India,
you might say: "Ha! Now's my chance to hunt lions and tigers!"
But if you're invited to hunt sharks in their native element,
you might want to think it over before accepting.
As for me, I passed a hand over my brow, where beads of cold sweat
were busy forming.
"Let's think this over," I said to myself, "and let's take our time.
Hunting otters in underwater forests, as we did in the forests
of Crespo Island, is an acceptable activity. But to roam
the bottom of the sea when you're almost certain to meet man-eaters
in the neighborhood, that's another story! I know that in
certain countries, particularly the Andaman Islands, Negroes don't
hesitate to attack sharks, dagger in one hand and noose in the other;
but I also know that many who face those fearsome animals don't come
back alive. Besides, I'm not a Negro, and even if I were a Negro,
in this instance I don't think a little hesitation on my part would
be out of place."
And there I was, fantasizing about sharks, envisioning huge jaws armed
with multiple rows of teeth and capable of cutting a man in half.
I could already feel a definite pain around my pelvic girdle.
And how I resented the offhand manner in which the captain had
extended his deplorable invitation! You would have thought it
was an issue of going into the woods on some harmless fox hunt!
"Thank heavens!" I said to myself. "Conseil will never want to
come along, and that'll be my excuse for not going with the captain."
As for Ned Land, I admit I felt less confident of his wisdom.
Danger, however great, held a perennial attraction for
his aggressive nature.
I went back to reading Sirr's book, but I leafed through it mechanically.
Between the lines I kept seeing fearsome, wide-open jaws.
Just then Conseil and the Canadian entered with a calm, even gleeful air.
Little did they know what was waiting for them.
"Ye gods, sir!" Ned Land told me. "Your Captain Nemo--the devil
take him--has just made us a very pleasant proposition!"
"Oh!" I said "You know about--"
"With all due respect to master," Conseil replied, "the Nautilus's
commander has invited us, together with master, for a visit tomorrow
to Ceylon's magnificent pearl fisheries. He did so in the most
cordial terms and conducted himself like a true gentleman."
"He didn't tell you anything else?"
171
"Nothing, sir," the Canadian replied. "He said you'd already
discussed this little stroll."
"Indeed," I said. "But didn't he give you any details on--"
"Not a one, Mr. Naturalist. You will be going with us, right?"
"Me? Why yes, certainly, of course! I can see that you like
the idea, Mr. Land."
"Yes! It will be a really unusual experience!"
"And possibly dangerous!" I added in an insinuating tone.
"Dangerous?" Ned Land replied. "A simple trip to an oysterbank?"
Assuredly, Captain Nemo hadn't seen fit to plant the idea of sharks
in the minds of my companions. For my part, I stared at them
with anxious eyes, as if they were already missing a limb or two.
Should I alert them? Yes, surely, but I hardly knew how to go about it.
"Would master," Conseil said to me, "give us some background
on pearl fishing?"
"On the fishing itself?" I asked. "Or on the occupational hazards that--"
"On the fishing," the Canadian replied. "Before we tackle the terrain,
it helps to be familiar with it."
"All right, sit down, my friends, and I'll teach you everything I
myself have just been taught by the Englishman H. C. Sirr!"
Ned and Conseil took seats on a couch, and right off the Canadian
said to me:
"Sir, just what is a pearl exactly?"
"My gallant Ned," I replied, "for poets a pearl is a tear from the sea;
for Orientals it's a drop of solidified dew; for the ladies it's
a jewel they can wear on their fingers, necks, and ears that's
oblong in shape, glassy in luster, and formed from mother-of-pearl;
for chemists it's a mixture of calcium phosphate and calcium
carbonate with a little gelatin protein; and finally, for naturalists
it's a simple festering secretion from the organ that produces
mother-of-pearl in certain bivalves."
"Branch Mollusca," Conseil said, "class Acephala, order Testacea."
"Correct, my scholarly Conseil. Now then, those Testacea capable
of producing pearls include rainbow abalone, turbo snails,
giant clams, and saltwater scallops--briefly, all those that secrete
mother-of-pearl, in other words, that blue, azure, violet, or white
substance lining the insides of their valves."
"Are mussels included too?" the Canadian asked.
"Yes! The mussels of certain streams in Scotland, Wales, Ireland,
Saxony, Bohemia, and France."
172
"Good!" the Canadian replied. "From now on we'll pay closer
attention to 'em."
"But," I went on, "for secreting pearls, the ideal mollusk is the pearl
oyster Meleagrina margaritifera, that valuable shellfish. Pearls result
simply from mother-of-pearl solidifying into a globular shape.
Either they stick to the oyster's shell, or they become embedded
in the creature's folds. On the valves a pearl sticks fast;
on the flesh it lies loose. But its nucleus is always some small,
hard object, say a sterile egg or a grain of sand, around which
the mother-of-pearl is deposited in thin, concentric layers over
several years in succession."
"Can one find several pearls in the same oyster?" Conseil asked.
"Yes, my boy. There are some shellfish that turn into real
jewel coffers. They even mention one oyster, about which I
remain dubious, that supposedly contained at least 150 sharks."
"150 sharks!" Ned Land yelped.
"Did I say sharks?" I exclaimed hastily. "I meant 150 pearls.
Sharks wouldn't make sense."
"Indeed," Conseil said. "But will master now tell us how one goes
about extracting these pearls?"
"One proceeds in several ways, and often when pearls stick
to the valves, fishermen even pull them loose with pliers.
But usually the shellfish are spread out on mats made from the esparto
grass that covers the beaches. Thus they die in the open air,
and by the end of ten days they've rotted sufficiently. Next they're
immersed in huge tanks of salt water, then they're opened up and washed.
At this point the sorters begin their twofold task. First they
remove the layers of mother-of-pearl, which are known in the industry
by the names legitimate silver, bastard white, or bastard black,
and these are shipped out in cases weighing 125 to 150 kilograms.
Then they remove the oyster's meaty tissue, boil it, and finally
strain it, in order to extract even the smallest pearls."
"Do the prices of these pearls differ depending on their size?"
Conseil asked.
"Not only on their size," I replied, "but also according to their shape,
their water--in other words, their color--and their orient--
in other words, that dappled, shimmering glow that makes them so
delightful to the eye. The finest pearls are called virgin pearls,
or paragons; they form in isolation within the mollusk's tissue.
They're white, often opaque but sometimes of opalescent transparency,
and usually spherical or pear-shaped. The spherical ones
are made into bracelets; the pear-shaped ones into earrings,
and since they're the most valuable, they're priced individually.
The other pearls that stick to the oyster's shell are more erratically
shaped and are priced by weight. Finally, classed in the lowest order,
the smallest pearls are known by the name seed pearls; they're priced
by the measuring cup and are used mainly in the creation of embroidery
for church vestments."
"But it must be a long, hard job, sorting out these pearls by size,"
the Canadian said.
173
"No, my friend. That task is performed with eleven strainers,
or sieves, that are pierced with different numbers of holes.
Those pearls staying in the strainers with twenty to eighty holes
are in the first order. Those not slipping through the sieves pierced
with 100 to 800 holes are in the second order. Finally, those pearls
for which one uses strainers pierced with 900 to 1,000 holes make
up the seed pearls."
"How ingenious," Conseil said, "to reduce dividing and classifying
pearls to a mechanical operation. And could master tell us the profits
brought in by harvesting these banks of pearl oysters?"
"According to Sirr's book," I replied, "these Ceylon fisheries
are farmed annually for a total profit of 3,000,000 man-eaters."
"Francs!" Conseil rebuked.
"Yes, francs! 3,000,000 francs!" I went on. "But I don't
think these fisheries bring in the returns they once did.
Similarly, the Central American fisheries used to make an annual
profit of 4,000,000 francs during the reign of King Charles V,
but now they bring in only two-thirds of that amount. All in all,
it's estimated that 9,000,000 francs is the current yearly return
for the whole pearl-harvesting industry."
"But," Conseil asked, "haven't certain famous pearls been quoted
at extremely high prices?"
"Yes, my boy. They say Julius Caesar gave Servilia a pearl worth
120,000 francs in our currency."
"I've even heard stories," the Canadian said, "about some lady
in ancient times who drank pearls in vinegar."
"Cleopatra," Conseil shot back.
"It must have tasted pretty bad," Ned Land added.
"Abominable, Ned my friend," Conseil replied. "But when a little
glass of vinegar is worth 1,500,000 francs, its taste is a small
price to pay."
"I'm sorry I didn't marry the gal," the Canadian said, throwing up
his hands with an air of discouragement.
"Ned Land married to Cleopatra?" Conseil exclaimed.
"But I was all set to tie the knot, Conseil," the Canadian replied in
all seriousness, "and it wasn't my fault the whole business fell through.
I even bought a pearl necklace for my fiancée, Kate Tender,
but she married somebody else instead. Well, that necklace cost
me only $1.50, but you can absolutely trust me on this, professor,
its pearls were so big, they wouldn't have gone through that strainer
with twenty holes."
"My gallant Ned," I replied, laughing, "those were artificial pearls,
ordinary glass beads whose insides were coated with Essence of Orient."
"Wow!" the Canadian replied. "That Essence of Orient must sell
174
for quite a large sum."
"As little as zero! It comes from the scales of a European carp,
it's nothing more than a silver substance that collects in the water
and is preserved in ammonia. It's worthless."
"Maybe that's why Kate Tender married somebody else,"
replied Mr. Land philosophically.
"But," I said, "getting back to pearls of great value, I don't
think any sovereign ever possessed one superior to the pearl owned
by Captain Nemo."
"This one?" Conseil said, pointing to a magnificent jewel in
its glass case.
"Exactly. And I'm certainly not far off when I estimate its value
at 2,000,000 . . . uh . . ."
"Francs!" Conseil said quickly.
"Yes," I said, "2,000,000 francs, and no doubt all it cost our
captain was the effort to pick it up."
"Ha!" Ned Land exclaimed. "During our stroll tomorrow, who says
we won't run into one just like it?"
"Bah!" Conseil put in.
"And why not?"
"What good would a pearl worth millions do us here on the Nautilus?"
"Here, no," Ned Land said. "But elsewhere. . . ."
"Oh! Elsewhere!" Conseil put in, shaking his head.
"In fact," I said, "Mr. Land is right. And if we ever brought back
to Europe or America a pearl worth millions, it would make the story
of our adventures more authentic--and much more rewarding."
"That's how I see it," the Canadian said.
"But," said Conseil, who perpetually returned to the didactic side
of things, "is this pearl fishing ever dangerous?"
"No," I replied quickly, "especially if one takes certain precautions."
"What risks would you run in a job like that?" Ned Land said.
"Swallowing a few gulps of salt water?"
"Whatever you say, Ned." Then, trying to imitate Captain Nemo's
carefree tone, I asked, "By the way, gallant Ned, are you
afraid of sharks?"
"Me?" the Canadian replied. "I'm a professional harpooner!
It's my job to make a mockery of them!"
"It isn't an issue," I said, "of fishing for them with a swivel hook,
hoisting them onto the deck of a ship, chopping off the tail
175
with a sweep of the ax, opening the belly, ripping out the heart,
and tossing it into the sea."
"So it's an issue of . . . ?"
"Yes, precisely."
"In the water?"
"In the water."
"Ye gods, just give me a good harpoon! You see, sir, these sharks
are badly designed. They have to roll their bellies over to snap
you up, and in the meantime . . ."
Ned Land had a way of pronouncing the word "snap" that sent chills
down the spine.
"Well, how about you, Conseil? What are your feelings
about these man-eaters?"
"Me?" Conseil said. "I'm afraid I must be frank with master."
Good for you, I thought.
"If master faces these sharks," Conseil said, "I think his loyal
manservant should face them with him!"
176
CHAPTER 3
A Pearl Worth Ten Million
NIGHT FELL. I went to bed. I slept pretty poorly. Man-eaters played
a major role in my dreams. And I found it more or less appropriate
that the French word for shark, requin, has its linguistic roots
in the word requiem.
The next day at four o'clock in the morning, I was awakened by
the steward whom Captain Nemo had placed expressly at my service.
I got up quickly, dressed, and went into the lounge.
Captain Nemo was waiting for me.
"Professor Aronnax," he said to me, "are you ready to start?"
"I'm ready."
"Kindly follow me."
"What about my companions, captain?"
"They've been alerted and are waiting for us."
"Aren't we going to put on our diving suits?" I asked.
"Not yet. I haven't let the Nautilus pull too near the coast,
and we're fairly well out from the Mannar oysterbank.
But I have the skiff ready, and it will take us to the exact spot
where we'll disembark, which will save us a pretty long trek.
It's carrying our diving equipment, and we'll suit up just before we
begin our underwater exploring."
Captain Nemo took me to the central companionway whose steps led
to the platform. Ned and Conseil were there, enraptured with
the "pleasure trip" getting under way. Oars in position,
five of the Nautilus's sailors were waiting for us aboard the skiff,
which was moored alongside. The night was still dark.
Layers of clouds cloaked the sky and left only a few stars in view.
My eyes flew to the side where land lay, but I saw only a blurred line
covering three-quarters of the horizon from southwest to northwest.
Going up Ceylon's west coast during the night, the Nautilus lay
west of the bay, or rather that gulf formed by the mainland
and Mannar Island. Under these dark waters there stretched
the bank of shellfish, an inexhaustible field of pearls more than
twenty miles long.
Captain Nemo, Conseil, Ned Land, and I found seats in the stern
of the skiff. The longboat's coxswain took the tiller; his four
companions leaned into their oars; the moorings were cast off
and we pulled clear.
The skiff headed southward. The oarsmen took their time.
I watched their strokes vigorously catch the water, and they
always waited ten seconds before rowing again, following the
practice used in most navies. While the longboat coasted,
drops of liquid flicked from the oars and hit the dark troughs
177
of the waves, pitter-pattering like splashes of molten lead.
Coming from well out, a mild swell made the skiff roll gently,
and a few cresting billows lapped at its bow.
We were silent. What was Captain Nemo thinking? Perhaps that
this approaching shore was too close for comfort, contrary to
the Canadian's views in which it still seemed too far away.
As for Conseil, he had come along out of simple curiosity.
Near 5:30 the first glimmers of light on the horizon defined
the upper lines of the coast with greater distinctness.
Fairly flat to the east, it swelled a little toward the south.
Five miles still separated it from us, and its beach merged with
the misty waters. Between us and the shore, the sea was deserted.
Not a boat, not a diver. Profound solitude reigned over this
gathering place of pearl fishermen. As Captain Nemo had commented,
we were arriving in these waterways a month too soon.
At six o'clock the day broke suddenly, with that speed unique
to tropical regions, which experience no real dawn or dusk.
The sun's rays pierced the cloud curtain gathered on the easterly horizon,
and the radiant orb rose swiftly.
I could clearly see the shore, which featured a few sparse trees
here and there.
The skiff advanced toward Mannar Island, which curved to the south.
Captain Nemo stood up from his thwart and studied the sea.
At his signal the anchor was lowered, but its chain barely ran
because the bottom lay no more than a meter down, and this locality
was one of the shallowest spots near the bank of shellfish.
Instantly the skiff wheeled around under the ebb tide's outbound thrust.
"Here we are, Professor Aronnax," Captain Nemo then said.
"You observe this confined bay? A month from now in this very place,
the numerous fishing boats of the harvesters will gather,
and these are the waters their divers will ransack so daringly.
This bay is felicitously laid out for their type of fishing.
It's sheltered from the strongest winds, and the sea is never
very turbulent here, highly favorable conditions for diving work.
Now let's put on our underwater suits, and we'll begin our stroll."
I didn't reply, and while staring at these suspicious waves, I began
to put on my heavy aquatic clothes, helped by the longboat's sailors.
Captain Nemo and my two companions suited up as well.
None of the Nautilus's men were to go with us on this new excursion.
Soon we were imprisoned up to the neck in india-rubber clothing,
and straps fastened the air devices onto our backs.
As for the Ruhmkorff device, it didn't seem to be in the picture.
Before inserting my head into its copper capsule, I commented
on this to the captain.
"Our lighting equipment would be useless to us," the captain answered me.
"We won't be going very deep, and the sun's rays will be sufficient
to light our way. Besides, it's unwise to carry electric lanterns
under these waves. Their brightness might unexpectedly attract
certain dangerous occupants of these waterways."
178
As Captain Nemo pronounced these words, I turned to Conseil and
Ned Land. But my two friends had already encased their craniums
in their metal headgear, and they could neither hear nor reply.
I had one question left to address to Captain Nemo.
"What about our weapons?" I asked him. "Our rifles?"
"Rifles! What for? Don't your mountaineers attack bears dagger in hand?
And isn't steel surer than lead? Here's a sturdy blade.
Slip it under your belt and let's be off."
I stared at my companions. They were armed in the same fashion,
and Ned Land was also brandishing an enormous harpoon he had stowed
in the skiff before leaving the Nautilus.
Then, following the captain's example, I let myself be crowned with my
heavy copper sphere, and our air tanks immediately went into action.
An instant later, the longboat's sailors helped us overboard one after
the other, and we set foot on level sand in a meter and a half of water.
Captain Nemo gave us a hand signal. We followed him down a gentle
slope and disappeared under the waves.
There the obsessive fears in my brain left me. I became surprisingly
calm again. The ease with which I could move increased my confidence,
and the many strange sights captivated my imagination.
The sun was already sending sufficient light under these waves.
The tiniest objects remained visible. After ten minutes of walking,
we were in five meters of water, and the terrain had become almost flat.
Like a covey of snipe over a marsh, there rose underfoot schools
of unusual fish from the genus Monopterus, whose members have no fin
but their tail. I recognized the Javanese eel, a genuine eight-decimeter
serpent with a bluish gray belly, which, without the gold lines
over its flanks, could easily be confused with the conger eel.
From the butterfish genus, whose oval bodies are very flat,
I observed several adorned in brilliant colors and sporting a dorsal
fin like a sickle, edible fish that, when dried and marinated, make an
excellent dish known by the name "karawade"; then some sea poachers,
fish belonging to the genus Aspidophoroides, whose bodies are covered
with scaly armor divided into eight lengthwise sections.
Meanwhile, as the sun got progressively higher, it lit up the watery
mass more and more. The seafloor changed little by little.
Its fine-grained sand was followed by a genuine causeway
of smooth crags covered by a carpet of mollusks and zoophytes.
Among other specimens in these two branches, I noted some windowpane
oysters with thin valves of unequal size, a type of ostracod unique
to the Red Sea and the Indian Ocean, then orange-hued lucina with
circular shells, awl-shaped auger shells, some of those Persian
murex snails that supply the Nautilus with such wonderful dye,
spiky periwinkles fifteen centimeters long that rose under the waves
like hands ready to grab you, turban snails with shells made of horn
and bristling all over with spines, lamp shells, edible duck clams
that feed the Hindu marketplace, subtly luminous jellyfish of the species
Pelagia panopyra, and finally some wonderful Oculina flabelliforma,
magnificent sea fans that fashion one of the most luxuriant tree
forms in this ocean.
179
In the midst of this moving vegetation, under arbors of water plants,
there raced legions of clumsy articulates, in particular some fanged
frog crabs whose carapaces form a slightly rounded triangle,
robber crabs exclusive to these waterways, and horrible
parthenope crabs whose appearance was repulsive to the eye.
One animal no less hideous, which I encountered several times,
was the enormous crab that Mr. Darwin observed, to which nature
has given the instinct and requisite strength to eat coconuts;
it scrambles up trees on the beach and sends the coconuts tumbling;
they fracture in their fall and are opened by its powerful pincers.
Here, under these clear waves, this crab raced around with
matchless agility, while green turtles from the species frequenting
the Malabar coast moved sluggishly among the crumbling rocks.
Near seven o'clock we finally surveyed the bank of shellfish,
where pearl oysters reproduce by the millions. These valuable
mollusks stick to rocks, where they're strongly attached
by a mass of brown filaments that forbids their moving about.
In this respect oysters are inferior even to mussels, to whom nature
has not denied all talent for locomotion.
The shellfish Meleagrina, that womb for pearls whose valves are
nearly equal in size, has the shape of a round shell with thick
walls and a very rough exterior. Some of these shells were furrowed
with flaky, greenish bands that radiated down from the top.
These were the young oysters. The others had rugged black surfaces,
measured up to fifteen centimeters in width, and were ten or
more years old.
Captain Nemo pointed to this prodigious heap of shellfish, and I
saw that these mines were genuinely inexhaustible, since nature's
creative powers are greater than man's destructive instincts.
True to those instincts, Ned Land greedily stuffed the finest
of these mollusks into a net he carried at his side.
But we couldn't stop. We had to follow the captain,
who headed down trails seemingly known only to himself.
The seafloor rose noticeably, and when I lifted my arms,
sometimes they would pass above the surface of the sea.
Then the level of the oysterbank would lower unpredictably.
Often we went around tall, pointed rocks rising like pyramids.
In their dark crevices huge crustaceans, aiming their long legs
like heavy artillery, watched us with unblinking eyes, while underfoot
there crept millipedes, bloodworms, aricia worms, and annelid worms,
whose antennas and tubular tentacles were incredibly long.
Just then a huge cave opened up in our path, hollowed from a
picturesque pile of rocks whose smooth heights were completely
hung with underwater flora. At first this cave looked pitch-black
to me. Inside, the sun's rays seemed to diminish by degrees.
Their hazy transparency was nothing more than drowned light.
Captain Nemo went in. We followed him. My eyes soon grew accustomed
to this comparative gloom. I distinguished the unpredictably contoured
springings of a vault, supported by natural pillars firmly based on
a granite foundation, like the weighty columns of Tuscan architecture.
Why had our incomprehensible guide taken us into the depths of this
underwater crypt? I would soon find out.
180
After going down a fairly steep slope, our feet trod the floor
of a sort of circular pit. There Captain Nemo stopped, and his hand
indicated an object that I hadn't yet noticed.
It was an oyster of extraordinary dimensions, a titanic giant clam,
a holy-water font that could have held a whole lake, a basin
more than two meters wide, hence even bigger than the one adorning
the Nautilus's lounge.
I approached this phenomenal mollusk. Its mass of filaments attached
it to a table of granite, and there it grew by itself in the midst
of the cave's calm waters. I estimated the weight of this giant clam
at 300 kilograms. Hence such an oyster held fifteen kilos of meat,
and you'd need the stomach of King Gargantua to eat a couple dozen.
Captain Nemo was obviously familiar with this bivalve's existence.
This wasn't the first time he'd paid it a visit, and I thought
his sole reason for leading us to this locality was to show
us a natural curiosity. I was mistaken. Captain Nemo had an
explicit personal interest in checking on the current condition
of this giant clam.
The mollusk's two valves were partly open. The captain approached
and stuck his dagger vertically between the shells to discourage
any ideas about closing; then with his hands he raised the fringed,
membrane-filled tunic that made up the animal's mantle.
There, between its leaflike folds, I saw a loose pearl as big as
a coconut. Its globular shape, perfect clarity, and wonderful orient
made it a jewel of incalculable value. Carried away by curiosity,
I stretched out my hand to take it, weigh it, fondle it!
But the captain stopped me, signaled no, removed his dagger in one
swift motion, and let the two valves snap shut.
I then understood Captain Nemo's intent. By leaving the pearl buried
beneath the giant clam's mantle, he allowed it to grow imperceptibly.
With each passing year the mollusk's secretions added new
concentric layers. The captain alone was familiar with the cave
where this wonderful fruit of nature was "ripening"; he alone
reared it, so to speak, in order to transfer it one day to his
dearly beloved museum. Perhaps, following the examples of oyster
farmers in China and India, he had even predetermined the creation
of this pearl by sticking under the mollusk's folds some piece
of glass or metal that was gradually covered with mother-of-pearl.
In any case, comparing this pearl to others I already knew about,
and to those shimmering in the captain's collection, I estimated
that it was worth at least 10,000,000 francs. It was a superb
natural curiosity rather than a luxurious piece of jewelry,
because I don't know of any female ear that could handle it.
Our visit to this opulent giant clam came to an end.
Captain Nemo left the cave, and we climbed back up the bank
of shellfish in the midst of these clear waters not yet disturbed
by divers at work.
We walked by ourselves, genuine loiterers stopping or straying
as our fancies dictated. For my part, I was no longer worried
about those dangers my imagination had so ridiculously exaggerated.
The shallows drew noticeably closer to the surface of the sea,
and soon, walking in only a meter of water, my head passed well above
181
the level of the ocean. Conseil rejoined me, and gluing his huge
copper capsule to mine, his eyes gave me a friendly greeting.
But this lofty plateau measured only a few fathoms, and soon we
reentered Our Element. I think I've now earned the right to
dub it that.
Ten minutes later, Captain Nemo stopped suddenly. I thought he'd
called a halt so that we could turn and start back. No. With a gesture
he ordered us to crouch beside him at the foot of a wide crevice.
His hand motioned toward a spot within the liquid mass,
and I looked carefully.
Five meters away a shadow appeared and dropped to the seafloor.
The alarming idea of sharks crossed my mind. But I was mistaken,
and once again we didn't have to deal with monsters of the deep.
It was a man, a living man, a black Indian fisherman, a poor devil
who no doubt had come to gather what he could before harvest time.
I saw the bottom of his dinghy, moored a few feet above his head.
He would dive and go back up in quick succession. A stone cut
in the shape of a sugar loaf, which he gripped between his feet
while a rope connected it to his boat, served to lower him more
quickly to the ocean floor. This was the extent of his equipment.
Arriving on the seafloor at a depth of about five meters, he fell
to his knees and stuffed his sack with shellfish gathered at random.
Then he went back up, emptied his sack, pulled up his stone, and started
all over again, the whole process lasting only thirty seconds.
This diver didn't see us. A shadow cast by our crag hid us from
his view. And besides, how could this poor Indian ever have guessed
that human beings, creatures like himself, were near him under
the waters, eavesdropping on his movements, not missing a single
detail of his fishing!
So he went up and down several times. He gathered only about
ten shellfish per dive, because he had to tear them from
the banks where each clung with its tough mass of filaments.
And how many of these oysters for which he risked his life would
have no pearl in them!
I observed him with great care. His movements were systematically
executed, and for half an hour no danger seemed to threaten him.
So I had gotten used to the sight of this fascinating fishing
when all at once, just as the Indian was kneeling on the seafloor,
I saw him make a frightened gesture, stand, and gather himself
to spring back to the surface of the waves.
I understood his fear. A gigantic shadow appeared above the poor diver.
It was a shark of huge size, moving in diagonally, eyes ablaze,
jaws wide open!
I was speechless with horror, unable to make a single movement.
With one vigorous stroke of its fins, the voracious animal shot
toward the Indian, who jumped aside and avoided the shark's bite
but not the thrashing of its tail, because that tail struck him
across the chest and stretched him out on the seafloor.
This scene lasted barely a few seconds. The shark returned,
rolled over on its back, and was getting ready to cut the Indian in half,
182
when Captain Nemo, who was stationed beside me, suddenly stood up.
Then he strode right toward the monster, dagger in hand, ready to
fight it at close quarters.
Just as it was about to snap up the poor fisherman, the man-eater
saw its new adversary, repositioned itself on its belly, and headed
swiftly toward him.
I can see Captain Nemo's bearing to this day. Bracing himself,
he waited for the fearsome man-eater with wonderful composure,
and when the latter rushed at him, the captain leaped aside
with prodigious quickness, avoided a collision, and sank his
dagger into its belly. But that wasn't the end of the story.
A dreadful battle was joined.
The shark bellowed, so to speak. Blood was pouring into the waves
from its wounds. The sea was dyed red, and through this opaque
liquid I could see nothing else.
Nothing else until the moment when, through a rift in the clouds,
I saw the daring captain clinging to one of the animal's fins,
fighting the monster at close quarters, belaboring his
enemy's belly with stabs of the dagger yet unable to deliver
the deciding thrust, in other words, a direct hit to the heart.
In its struggles the man-eater churned the watery mass so furiously,
its eddies threatened to knock me over.
I wanted to run to the captain's rescue. But I was transfixed
with horror, unable to move.
I stared, wild-eyed. I saw the fight enter a new phase.
The captain fell to the seafloor, toppled by the enormous mass
weighing him down. Then the shark's jaws opened astoundingly wide,
like a pair of industrial shears, and that would have been
the finish of Captain Nemo had not Ned Land, quick as thought,
rushed forward with his harpoon and driven its dreadful point
into the shark's underside.
The waves were saturated with masses of blood. The waters
shook with the movements of the man-eater, which thrashed about
with indescribable fury. Ned Land hadn't missed his target.
This was the monster's death rattle. Pierced to the heart,
it was struggling with dreadful spasms whose aftershocks knocked
Conseil off his feet.
Meanwhile Ned Land pulled the captain clear. Uninjured, the latter
stood up, went right to the Indian, quickly cut the rope binding
the man to his stone, took the fellow in his arms, and with a vigorous
kick of the heel, rose to the surface of the sea.
The three of us followed him, and a few moments later, miraculously safe,
we reached the fisherman's longboat.
Captain Nemo's first concern was to revive this unfortunate man.
I wasn't sure he would succeed. I hoped so, since the poor devil
hadn't been under very long. But that stroke from the shark's tail
could have been his deathblow.
Fortunately, after vigorous massaging by Conseil and the captain,
I saw the nearly drowned man regain consciousness little by little.
183
He opened his eyes. How startled he must have felt, how frightened even,
at seeing four huge, copper craniums leaning over him!
And above all, what must he have thought when Captain Nemo pulled
a bag of pearls from a pocket in his diving suit and placed it
in the fisherman's hands? This magnificent benefaction from
the Man of the Waters to the poor Indian from Ceylon was accepted
by the latter with trembling hands. His bewildered eyes indicated
that he didn't know to what superhuman creatures he owed both his
life and his fortune.
At the captain's signal we returned to the bank of shellfish,
and retracing our steps, we walked for half an hour until we encountered
the anchor connecting the seafloor with the Nautilus's skiff.
Back on board, the sailors helped divest us of our heavy copper carapaces.
Captain Nemo's first words were spoken to the Canadian.
"Thank you, Mr. Land," he told him.
"Tit for tat, captain," Ned Land replied. "I owed it to you."
The ghost of a smile glided across the captain's lips, and that was all.
"To the Nautilus," he said.
The longboat flew over the waves. A few minutes later we encountered
the shark's corpse again, floating.
From the black markings on the tips of its fins, I recognized
the dreadful Squalus melanopterus from the seas of the East Indies,
a variety in the species of sharks proper. It was more than twenty-five
feet long; its enormous mouth occupied a third of its body.
It was an adult, as could be seen from the six rows of teeth forming
an isosceles triangle in its upper jaw.
Conseil looked at it with purely scientific fascination,
and I'm sure he placed it, not without good reason, in the class
of cartilaginous fish, order Chondropterygia with fixed gills,
family Selacia, genus Squalus.
While I was contemplating this inert mass, suddenly a dozen of these
voracious melanoptera appeared around our longboat; but, paying no
attention to us, they pounced on the corpse and quarreled over every
scrap of it.
By 8:30 we were back on board the Nautilus.
There I fell to thinking about the incidents that marked our excursion
over the Mannar oysterbank. Two impressions inevitably stood out.
One concerned Captain Nemo's matchless bravery, the other his devotion
to a human being, a representative of that race from which he had
fled beneath the seas. In spite of everything, this strange man
hadn't yet succeeded in completely stifling his heart.
When I shared these impressions with him, he answered me in a tone
touched with emotion:
"That Indian, professor, lives in the land of the oppressed,
184
and I am to this day, and will be until my last breath, a native
of that same land!"
185
CHAPTER 4
The Red Sea
DURING THE DAY of January 29, the island of Ceylon disappeared
below the horizon, and at a speed of twenty miles per hour,
the Nautilus glided into the labyrinthine channels that separate
the Maldive and Laccadive Islands. It likewise hugged Kiltan Island,
a shore of madreporic origin discovered by Vasco da Gama in 1499 and
one of nineteen chief islands in the island group of the Laccadives,
located between latitude 10 degrees and 14 degrees 30' north, and between
longitude 50 degrees 72' and 69 degrees east.
By then we had fared 16,220 miles, or 7,500 leagues, from our starting
point in the seas of Japan.
The next day, January 30, when the Nautilus rose to the surface
of the ocean, there was no more land in sight. Setting its course
to the north-northwest, the ship headed toward the Gulf of Oman,
carved out between Arabia and the Indian peninsula and providing
access to the Persian Gulf.
This was obviously a blind alley with no possible outlet.
So where was Captain Nemo taking us? I was unable to say.
Which didn't satisfy the Canadian, who that day asked me where
we were going.
"We're going, Mr. Ned, where the captain's fancy takes us."
"His fancy," the Canadian replied, "won't take us very far.
The Persian Gulf has no outlet, and if we enter those waters,
it won't be long before we return in our tracks."
"All right, we'll return, Mr. Land, and after the Persian Gulf,
if the Nautilus wants to visit the Red Sea, the Strait of Bab el
Mandeb is still there to let us in!"
"I don't have to tell you, sir," Ned Land replied, "that the Red Sea
is just as landlocked as the gulf, since the Isthmus of Suez hasn't
been cut all the way through yet; and even if it was, a boat
as secretive as ours wouldn't risk a canal intersected with locks.
So the Red Sea won't be our way back to Europe either."
"But I didn't say we'd return to Europe."
"What do you figure, then?"
"I figure that after visiting these unusual waterways of Arabia
and Egypt, the Nautilus will go back down to the Indian Ocean,
perhaps through Mozambique Channel, perhaps off the Mascarene Islands,
and then make for the Cape of Good Hope."
"And once we're at the Cape of Good Hope?" the Canadian asked
with typical persistence.
"Well then, we'll enter that Atlantic Ocean with which we
aren't yet familiar. What's wrong, Ned my friend?
Are you tired of this voyage under the seas? Are you bored
with the constantly changing sight of these underwater wonders?
186
Speaking for myself, I'll be extremely distressed to see the end
of a voyage so few men will ever have a chance to make."
"But don't you realize, Professor Aronnax," the Canadian replied,
"that soon we'll have been imprisoned for three whole months
aboard this Nautilus?"
"No, Ned, I didn't realize it, I don't want to realize it, and I
don't keep track of every day and every hour."
"But when will it be over?"
"In its appointed time. Meanwhile there's nothing we can do about it,
and our discussions are futile. My gallant Ned, if you come and tell me,
'A chance to escape is available to us,' then I'll discuss it with you.
But that isn't the case, and in all honesty, I don't think Captain Nemo
ever ventures into European seas."
This short dialogue reveals that in my mania for the Nautilus, I was
turning into the spitting image of its commander.
As for Ned Land, he ended our talk in his best speechifying style:
"That's all fine and dandy. But in my humble opinion, a life
in jail is a life without joy."
For four days until February 3, the Nautilus inspected the Gulf of Oman
at various speeds and depths. It seemed to be traveling at random,
as if hesitating over which course to follow, but it never crossed
the Tropic of Cancer.
After leaving this gulf we raised Muscat for an instant,
the most important town in the country of Oman. I marveled at its
strange appearance in the midst of the black rocks surrounding it,
against which the white of its houses and forts stood out sharply.
I spotted the rounded domes of its mosques, the elegant tips
of its minarets, and its fresh, leafy terraces. But it was only
a fleeting vision, and the Nautilus soon sank beneath the dark
waves of these waterways.
Then our ship went along at a distance of six miles from the Arabic
coasts of Mahra and Hadhramaut, their undulating lines of mountains
relieved by a few ancient ruins. On February 5 we finally put
into the Gulf of Aden, a genuine funnel stuck into the neck of Bab
el Mandeb and bottling these Indian waters in the Red Sea.
On February 6 the Nautilus cruised in sight of the city of Aden,
perched on a promontory connected to the continent by a narrow isthmus,
a sort of inaccessible Gibraltar whose fortifications the English
rebuilt after capturing it in 1839. I glimpsed the octagonal
minarets of this town, which used to be one of the wealthiest,
busiest commercial centers along this coast, as the Arab historian
Idrisi tells it.
I was convinced that when Captain Nemo reached this point,
he would back out again; but I was mistaken, and much to my surprise,
he did nothing of the sort.
The next day, February 7, we entered the Strait of Bab el Mandeb,
whose name means "Gate of Tears" in the Arabic language.
Twenty miles wide, it's only fifty-two kilometers long,
187
and with the Nautilus launched at full speed, clearing it was
the work of barely an hour. But I didn't see a thing, not even
Perim Island where the British government built fortifications
to strengthen Aden's position. There were many English and French
steamers plowing this narrow passageway, liners going from Suez
to Bombay, Calcutta, Melbourne, Réunion Island, and Mauritius; far too
much traffic for the Nautilus to make an appearance on the surface.
So it wisely stayed in midwater.
Finally, at noon, we were plowing the waves of the Red Sea.
The Red Sea: that great lake so famous in biblical traditions,
seldom replenished by rains, fed by no important rivers,
continually drained by a high rate of evaporation, its water level
dropping a meter and a half every year! If it were fully landlocked
like a lake, this odd gulf might dry up completely; on this score
it's inferior to its neighbors, the Caspian Sea and the Dead Sea,
whose levels lower only to the point where their evaporation exactly
equals the amounts of water they take to their hearts.
This Red Sea is 2,600 kilometers long with an average width of 240.
In the days of the
Ptolemies and the Roman emperors, it was a great commercial
artery for the world, and when its isthmus has been cut through,
it will completely regain that bygone importance that the Suez
railways have already brought back in part.
I would not even attempt to understand the whim that induced
Captain Nemo to take us into this gulf. But I wholeheartedly
approved of the Nautilus's entering it. It adopted a medium pace,
sometimes staying on the surface, sometimes diving to avoid some ship,
and so I could observe both the inside and topside of this
highly unusual sea.
On February 8, as early as the first hours of daylight,
Mocha appeared before us: a town now in ruins, whose walls
would collapse at the mere sound of a cannon, and which shelters
a few leafy date trees here and there. This once-important city
used to contain six public marketplaces plus twenty-six mosques,
and its walls, protected by fourteen forts, fashioned a three-kilometer
girdle around it.
Then the Nautilus drew near the beaches of Africa, where the sea is
considerably deeper. There, through the open panels and in a midwater
of crystal clarity, our ship enabled us to study wonderful bushes
of shining coral and huge chunks of rock wrapped in splendid green
furs of algae and fucus. What an indescribable sight, and what
a variety of settings and scenery where these reefs and volcanic
islands leveled off by the Libyan coast! But soon the Nautilus hugged
the eastern shore where these tree forms appeared in all their glory.
This was off the coast of Tihama, and there such zoophyte displays
not only flourished below sea level but they also fashioned
picturesque networks that unreeled as high as ten fathoms above it;
the latter were more whimsical but less colorful than the former,
which kept their bloom thanks to the moist vitality of the waters.
How many delightful hours I spent in this way at the lounge window!
How many new specimens of underwater flora and fauna I
marveled at beneath the light of our electric beacon!
188
Mushroom-shaped fungus coral, some slate-colored sea anemone including
the species Thalassianthus aster among others, organ-pipe coral
arranged like flutes and just begging for a puff from the god Pan,
shells unique to this sea that dwell in madreporic cavities
and whose bases are twisted into squat spirals, and finally
a thousand samples of a polypary I hadn't observed until then:
the common sponge.
First division in the polyp group, the class Spongiaria has been
created by scientists precisely for this unusual exhibit whose
usefulness is beyond dispute. The sponge is definitely not a plant,
as some naturalists still believe, but an animal of the lowest order,
a polypary inferior even to coral. Its animal nature isn't in doubt,
and we can't accept even the views of the ancients, who regarded
it as halfway between plant and animal. But I must say that
naturalists are not in agreement on the structural mode of sponges.
For some it's a polypary, and for others, such as Professor Milne-Edwards,
it's a single, solitary individual.
The class Spongiaria contains about 300 species that are encountered
in a large number of seas and even in certain streams, where they've
been given the name freshwater sponges. But their waters of choice are
the Red Sea and the Mediterranean near the Greek Islands or the coast
of Syria. These waters witness the reproduction and growth of soft,
delicate bath sponges whose prices run as high as 150 francs apiece:
the yellow sponge from Syria, the horn sponge from Barbary, etc.
But since I had no hope of studying these zoophytes in the seaports
of the Levant, from which we were separated by the insuperable Isthmus
of Suez, I had to be content with observing them in the waters
of the Red Sea.
So I called Conseil to my side, while at an average depth of eight
to nine meters, the Nautilus slowly skimmed every beautiful rock
on the easterly coast.
There sponges grew in every shape, globular, stalklike,
leaflike, fingerlike. With reasonable accuracy, they lived up to
their nicknames of basket sponges, chalice sponges, distaff sponges,
elkhorn sponges, lion's paws, peacock's tails, and Neptune's gloves--
designations bestowed on them by fishermen, more poetically inclined
than scientists. A gelatinous, semifluid substance coated the fibrous
tissue of these sponges, and from this tissue there escaped a steady
trickle of water that, after carrying sustenance to each cell,
was being expelled by a contracting movement. This jellylike substance
disappears when the polyp dies, emitting ammonia as it rots.
Finally nothing remains but the fibers, either gelatinous or made
of horn, that constitute your household sponge, which takes on
a russet hue and is used for various tasks depending on its degree
of elasticity, permeability, or resistance to saturation.
These polyparies were sticking to rocks, shells of mollusks, and even
the stalks of water plants. They adorned the smallest crevices,
some sprawling, others standing or hanging like coral outgrowths.
I told Conseil that sponges are fished up in two ways, either by dragnet
or by hand. The latter method calls for the services of a diver,
but it's preferable because it spares the polypary's tissue,
leaving it with a much higher market value.
Other zoophytes swarming near the sponges consisted chiefly of a very
elegant species of jellyfish; mollusks were represented by varieties
189
of squid that, according to Professor Orbigny, are unique to the Red Sea;
and reptiles by virgata turtles belonging to the genus Chelonia,
which furnished our table with a dainty but wholesome dish.
As for fish, they were numerous and often remarkable. Here are
the ones that the Nautilus's nets most frequently hauled on board:
rays, including spotted rays that were oval in shape and brick
red in color, their bodies strewn with erratic blue speckles and
identifiable by their jagged double stings, silver-backed skates,
common stingrays with stippled tails, butterfly rays that looked
like huge two-meter cloaks flapping at middepth, toothless guitarfish
that were a type of cartilaginous fish closer to the shark,
trunkfish known as dromedaries that were one and a half feet long
and had humps ending in backward-curving stings, serpentine moray
eels with silver tails and bluish backs plus brown pectorals trimmed
in gray piping, a species of butterfish called the fiatola decked
out in thin gold stripes and the three colors of the French flag,
Montague blennies four decimeters long, superb jacks handsomely
embellished by seven black crosswise streaks with blue and yellow
fins plus gold and silver scales, snooks, standard mullet with
yellow heads, parrotfish, wrasse, triggerfish, gobies, etc., plus
a thousand other fish common to the oceans we had already crossed.
On February 9 the Nautilus cruised in the widest part of the Red Sea,
measuring 190 miles straight across from Suakin on the west coast
to Qunfidha on the east coast.
At noon that day after our position fix, Captain Nemo climbed onto
the platform, where I happened to be. I vowed not to let him go
below again without at least sounding him out on his future plans.
As soon as he saw me, he came over, graciously offered me a cigar,
and said to me:
"Well, professor, are you pleased with this Red Sea? Have you seen
enough of its hidden wonders, its fish and zoophytes, its gardens
of sponges and forests of coral? Have you glimpsed the towns built
on its shores?"
"Yes, Captain Nemo," I replied, "and the Nautilus is wonderfully
suited to this whole survey. Ah, it's a clever boat!"
"Yes, sir, clever, daring, and invulnerable! It fears neither
the Red Sea's dreadful storms nor its currents and reefs."
"Indeed," I said, "this sea is mentioned as one of the worst,
and in the days of the ancients, if I'm not mistaken, it had
an abominable reputation."
"Thoroughly abominable, Professor Aronnax. The Greek and Latin
historians can find nothing to say in its favor, and the Greek
geographer Strabo adds that it's especially rough during
the rainy season and the period of summer prevailing winds.
The Arab Idrisi, referring to it by the name Gulf of Colzoum,
relates that ships perished in large numbers on its sandbanks
and that no one risked navigating it by night. This, he claims,
is a sea subject to fearful hurricanes, strewn with inhospitable islands,
and 'with nothing good to offer,' either on its surface or in
its depths. As a matter of fact, the same views can also be found
in Arrian, Agatharchides, and Artemidorus."
190
"One can easily see," I answered, "that those historians didn't
navigate aboard the Nautilus."
"Indeed," the captain replied with a smile, "and in this respect,
the moderns aren't much farther along than the ancients.
It took many centuries to discover the mechanical power of steam!
Who knows whether we'll see a second Nautilus within the next 100 years!
Progress is slow, Professor Aronnax."
"It's true," I replied. "Your ship is a century ahead of its time,
perhaps several centuries. It would be most unfortunate if such
a secret were to die with its inventor!"
Captain Nemo did not reply. After some minutes of silence:
"We were discussing," he said, "the views of ancient historians
on the dangers of navigating this Red Sea?"
"True," I replied. "But weren't their fears exaggerated?"
"Yes and no, Professor Aronnax," answered Captain Nemo,
who seemed to know "his Red Sea" by heart. "To a modern ship,
well rigged, solidly constructed, and in control of its course
thanks to obedient steam, some conditions are no longer hazardous
that offered all sorts of dangers to the vessels of the ancients.
Picture those early navigators venturing forth in sailboats
built from planks lashed together with palm-tree ropes,
caulked with powdered resin, and coated with dogfish grease.
They didn't even have instruments for taking their bearings,
they went by guesswork in the midst of currents they barely knew.
Under such conditions, shipwrecks had to be numerous.
But nowadays steamers providing service between Suez and the South Seas
have nothing to fear from the fury of this gulf, despite the contrary
winds of its monsoons. Their captains and passengers no longer
prepare for departure with sacrifices to placate the gods,
and after returning, they don't traipse in wreaths and gold ribbons
to say thanks at the local temple."
"Agreed," I said. "And steam seems to have killed off all gratitude
in seamen's hearts. But since you seem to have made a special study
of this sea, captain, can you tell me how it got its name?"
"Many explanations exist on the subject, Professor Aronnax. Would you
like to hear the views of one chronicler in the 14th century?"
"Gladly."
"This fanciful fellow claims the sea was given its name after
the crossing of the Israelites, when the Pharaoh perished in those
waves that came together again at Moses' command:
To mark that miraculous sequel, the sea turned a red without equal.
Thus no other course would do but to name it for its hue."
"An artistic explanation, Captain Nemo," I replied, "but I'm unable
to rest content with it. So I'll ask you for your own personal views."
"Here they come. To my thinking, Professor Aronnax, this 'Red Sea'
designation must be regarded as a translation of the Hebrew word
191
'Edrom,' and if the ancients gave it that name, it was because of
the unique color of its waters."
"Until now, however, I've seen only clear waves, without any unique hue."
"Surely, but as we move ahead to the far end of this gulf,
you'll note its odd appearance. I recall seeing the bay of El Tur
completely red, like a lake of blood."
"And you attribute this color to the presence of microscopic algae?"
"Yes. It's a purplish, mucilaginous substance produced by those tiny
buds known by the name trichodesmia, 40,000 of which are needed
to occupy the space of one square millimeter. Perhaps you'll
encounter them when we reach El Tur."
"Hence, Captain Nemo, this isn't the first time you've gone through
the Red Sea aboard the Nautilus?"
"No, sir."
"Then, since you've already mentioned the crossing of the Israelites
and the catastrophe that befell the Egyptians, I would ask if you've ever
discovered any traces under the waters of that great historic event?"
"No, professor, and for an excellent reason."
"What's that?"
"It's because that same locality where Moses crossed with all his people
is now so clogged with sand, camels can barely get their legs wet.
You can understand that my Nautilus wouldn't have enough
water for itself."
"And that locality is . . . ?" I asked.
"That locality lies a little above Suez in a sound that used to form
a deep estuary when the Red Sea stretched as far as the Bitter Lakes.
Now, whether or not their crossing was literally miraculous,
the Israelites did cross there in returning to the Promised Land,
and the Pharaoh's army did perish at precisely that locality.
So I think that excavating those sands would bring to light a great
many weapons and tools of Egyptian origin."
"Obviously," I replied. "And for the sake of archaeology, let's hope
that sooner or later such excavations do take place, once new towns
are settled on the isthmus after the Suez Canal has been cut through--
a canal, by the way, of little use to a ship such as the Nautilus!"
"Surely, but of great use to the world at large," Captain Nemo said.
"The ancients well understood the usefulness to commerce of connecting
the Red Sea with the Mediterranean, but they never dreamed of cutting
a canal between the two, and instead they picked the Nile as their link.
If we can trust tradition, it was probably Egypt's King Sesostris
who started digging the canal needed to join the Nile with
the Red Sea. What's certain is that in 615 B.C. King Necho II
was hard at work on a canal that was fed by Nile water and ran
through the Egyptian plains opposite Arabia. This canal could
be traveled in four days, and it was so wide, two triple-tiered
galleys could pass through it abreast. Its construction was
192
continued by Darius the Great, son of Hystaspes, and probably
completed by King Ptolemy II. Strabo saw it used for shipping;
but the weakness of its slope between its starting point, near Bubastis,
and the Red Sea left it navigable only a few months out of the year.
This canal served commerce until the century of Rome's Antonine emperors;
it was then abandoned and covered with sand, subsequently reinstated
by Arabia's Caliph Omar I, and finally filled in for good in 761
or 762 A.D. by Caliph Al-Mansur, in an effort to prevent supplies
from reaching Mohammed ibn Abdullah, who had rebelled against him.
During his Egyptian campaign, your General Napoleon Bonaparte
discovered traces of this old canal in the Suez desert, and when
the tide caught him by surprise, he wellnigh perished just a few
hours before rejoining his regiment at Hadjaroth, the very place
where Moses had pitched camp 3,300 years before him."
"Well, captain, what the ancients hesitated to undertake, Mr. de
Lesseps is now finishing up; his joining of these two seas will
shorten the route from Cadiz to the East Indies by 9,000 kilometers,
and he'll soon change Africa into an immense island."
"Yes, Professor Aronnax, and you have every right to be proud of your
fellow countryman. Such a man brings a nation more honor than the
greatest commanders! Like so many others, he began with difficulties
and setbacks, but he triumphed because he has the volunteer spirit.
And it's sad to think that this deed, which should have been an
international deed, which would have insured that any administration
went down in history, will succeed only through the efforts of one man.
So all hail to Mr. de Lesseps!"
"Yes, all hail to that great French citizen," I replied,
quite startled by how emphatically Captain Nemo had just spoken.
"Unfortunately," he went on, "I can't take you through that Suez Canal,
but the day after tomorrow, you'll be able to see the long jetties
of Port Said when we're in the Mediterranean."
"In the Mediterranean!" I exclaimed.
"Yes, professor. Does that amaze you?"
"What amazes me is thinking we'll be there the day after tomorrow."
"Oh really?"
"Yes, captain, although since I've been aboard your vessel,
I should have formed the habit of not being amazed by anything!"
"But what is it that startles you?"
"The thought of how hideously fast the Nautilus will need to go,
if it's to double the Cape of Good Hope, circle around Africa,
and lie in the open Mediterranean by the day after tomorrow."
"And who says it will circle Africa, professor? What's this talk
about doubling the Cape of Good Hope?"
"But unless the Nautilus navigates on dry land and crosses
over the isthmus--"
"Or under it, Professor Aronnax."
193
"Under it?"
"Surely," Captain Nemo replied serenely. "Under that tongue of land,
nature long ago made what man today is making on its surface."
"What! There's a passageway?"
"Yes, an underground passageway that I've named the Arabian Tunnel.
It starts below Suez and leads to the Bay of Pelusium."
"But isn't that isthmus only composed of quicksand?"
"To a certain depth. But at merely fifty meters, one encounters
a firm foundation of rock."
"And it's by luck that you discovered this passageway?"
I asked, more and more startled.
"Luck plus logic, professor, and logic even more than luck."
"Captain, I hear you, but I can't believe my ears."
"Oh, sir! The old saying still holds good: Aures habent et non
audient!* Not only does this passageway exist, but I've taken
advantage of it on several occasions. Without it, I wouldn't
have ventured today into such a blind alley as the Red Sea."
*Latin: "They have ears but hear not." Ed.
"Is it indiscreet to ask how you discovered this tunnel?"
"Sir," the captain answered me, "there can be no secrets between men
who will never leave each other."
I ignored this innuendo and waited for Captain Nemo's explanation.
"Professor," he told me, "the simple logic of the naturalist led
me to discover this passageway, and I alone am familiar with it.
I'd noted that in the Red Sea and the Mediterranean there exist
a number of absolutely identical species of fish: eels, butterfish,
greenfish, bass, jewelfish, flying fish. Certain of this fact,
I wondered if there weren't a connection between the two seas.
If there were, its underground current had to go from the Red Sea
to the Mediterranean simply because of their difference in level.
So I caught a large number of fish in the vicinity of Suez. I slipped
copper rings around their tails and tossed them back into the sea.
A few months later off the coast of Syria, I recaptured a few
specimens of my fish, adorned with their telltale rings.
So this proved to me that some connection existed between the two seas.
I searched for it with my Nautilus, I discovered it, I ventured into it;
and soon, professor, you also will have cleared my Arabic tunnel!"
194
CHAPTER 5
Arabian Tunnel
THE SAME DAY, I reported to Conseil and Ned Land that part of
the foregoing conversation directly concerning them. When I told
them we would be lying in Mediterranean waters within two days,
Conseil clapped his hands, but the Canadian shrugged his shoulders.
"An underwater tunnel!" he exclaimed. "A connection between two seas!
Who ever heard of such malarkey!"
"Ned my friend," Conseil replied, "had you ever heard of
the Nautilus? No, yet here it is! So don't shrug your shoulders
so blithely, and don't discount something with the feeble excuse
that you've never heard of it."
"We'll soon see!" Ned Land shot back, shaking his head.
"After all, I'd like nothing better than to believe in your captain's
little passageway, and may Heaven grant it really does take us
to the Mediterranean."
The same evening, at latitude 21 degrees 30' north, the Nautilus was
afloat on the surface of the sea and drawing nearer to the Arab coast.
I spotted Jidda, an important financial center for Egypt, Syria, Turkey,
and the East Indies. I could distinguish with reasonable clarity
the overall effect of its buildings, the ships made fast along
its wharves, and those bigger vessels whose draft of water
required them to drop anchor at the port's offshore mooring.
The sun, fairly low on the horizon, struck full force on the houses
in this town, accenting their whiteness. Outside the city limits,
some wood or reed huts indicated the quarter where the bedouins lived.
Soon Jidda faded into the shadows of evening, and the Nautilus went
back beneath the mildly phosphorescent waters.
The next day, February 10, several ships appeared, running on our
opposite tack. The Nautilus resumed its underwater navigating;
but at the moment of our noon sights, the sea was deserted and the ship
rose again to its waterline.
With Ned and Conseil, I went to sit on the platform. The coast
to the east looked like a slightly blurred mass in a damp fog.
Leaning against the sides of the skiff, we were chatting of one
thing and another, when Ned Land stretched his hand toward a point
in the water, saying to me:
"See anything out there, professor?"
"No, Ned," I replied, "but you know I don't have your eyes."
"Take a good look," Ned went on. "There, ahead to starboard,
almost level with the beacon! Don't you see a mass that seems
to be moving around?"
"Right," I said after observing carefully, "I can make out something
like a long, blackish object on the surface of the water."
195
"A second Nautilus?" Conseil said.
"No," the Canadian replied, "unless I'm badly mistaken,
that's some marine animal."
"Are there whales in the Red Sea?" Conseil asked.
"Yes, my boy," I replied, "they're sometimes found here."
"That's no whale," continued Ned Land, whose eyes never strayed
from the object they had sighted. "We're old chums, whales and I,
and I couldn't mistake their little ways."
"Let's wait and see," Conseil said. "The Nautilus is heading
that direction, and we'll soon know what we're in for."
In fact, that blackish object was soon only a mile away from us.
It looked like a huge reef stranded in midocean. What was it?
I still couldn't make up my mind.
"Oh, it's moving off! It's diving!" Ned Land exclaimed.
"Damnation! What can that animal be? It doesn't have a forked
tail like baleen whales or sperm whales, and its fins look
like sawed-off limbs."
"But in that case--" I put in.
"Good lord," the Canadian went on, "it's rolled over on its back,
and it's raising its breasts in the air!"
"It's a siren!" Conseil exclaimed. "With all due respect to master,
it's an actual mermaid!"
That word "siren" put me back on track, and I realized that the animal
belonged to the order Sirenia: marine creatures that legends
have turned into mermaids, half woman, half fish.
"No," I told Conseil, "that's no mermaid, it's an unusual creature
of which only a few specimens are left in the Red Sea. That's a dugong."
"Order Sirenia, group Pisciforma, subclass Monodelphia, class Mammalia,
branch Vertebrata," Conseil replied.
And when Conseil has spoken, there's nothing else to be said.
Meanwhile Ned Land kept staring. His eyes were gleaming with desire
at the sight of that animal. His hands were ready to hurl a harpoon.
You would have thought he was waiting for the right moment to jump
overboard and attack the creature in its own element.
"Oh, sir," he told me in a voice trembling with excitement,
"I've never killed anything like that!"
His whole being was concentrated in this last word.
Just then Captain Nemo appeared on the platform. He spotted the dugong.
He understood the Canadian's frame of mind and addressed him directly:
"If you held a harpoon, Mr. Land, wouldn't your hands be itching
to put it to work?"
196
"Positively, sir."
"And just for one day, would it displease you to return to your
fisherman's trade and add this cetacean to the list of those you've
already hunted down?"
"It wouldn't displease me one bit."
"All right, you can try your luck!"
"Thank you, sir," Ned Land replied, his eyes ablaze.
"Only," the captain went on, "I urge you to aim carefully at this animal,
in your own personal interest."
"Is the dugong dangerous to attack?" I asked, despite the Canadian's
shrug of the shoulders.
"Yes, sometimes," the captain replied. "These animals have been
known to turn on their assailants and capsize their longboats.
But with Mr. Land that danger isn't to be feared. His eye is sharp,
his arm is sure. If I recommend that he aim carefully at this dugong,
it's because the animal is justly regarded as fine game, and I know
Mr. Land doesn't despise a choice morsel."
"Aha!" the Canadian put in. "This beast offers the added luxury
of being good to eat?"
"Yes, Mr. Land. Its flesh is actual red meat, highly prized,
and set aside throughout Malaysia for the tables of aristocrats.
Accordingly, this excellent animal has been hunted so bloodthirstily that,
like its manatee relatives, it has become more and more scarce."
"In that case, captain," Conseil said in all seriousness,
"on the offchance that this creature might be the last of its line,
wouldn't it be advisable to spare its life, in the interests of science?"
"Maybe," the Canadian answered, "it would be better to hunt it down,
in the interests of mealtime."
"Then proceed, Mr. Land," Captain Nemo replied.
Just then, as mute and emotionless as ever, seven crewmen climbed
onto the platform. One carried a harpoon and line similar
to those used in whale fishing. Its deck paneling opened,
the skiff was wrenched from its socket and launched to sea.
Six rowers sat on the thwarts, and the coxswain took the tiller.
Ned, Conseil, and I found seats in the stern.
"Aren't you coming, captain?" I asked.
"No, sir, but I wish you happy hunting."
The skiff pulled clear, and carried off by its six oars, it headed
swiftly toward the dugong, which by then was floating two miles
from the Nautilus.
Arriving within a few cable lengths of the cetacean, our longboat
slowed down, and the sculls dipped noiselessly into the tranquil waters.
197
Harpoon in hand, Ned Land went to take his stand in the skiff's bow.
Harpoons used for hunting whales are usually attached to a very long
rope that pays out quickly when the wounded animal drags it with him.
But this rope measured no more than about ten fathoms, and its end
had simply been fastened to a small barrel that, while floating,
would indicate the dugong's movements beneath the waters.
I stood up and could clearly observe the Canadian's adversary.
This dugong--which also boasts the name halicore--closely resembled
a manatee. Its oblong body ended in a very long caudal fin and
its lateral fins in actual fingers. It differs from the manatee
in that its upper jaw is armed with two long, pointed teeth that form
diverging tusks on either side.
This dugong that Ned Land was preparing to attack was of
colossal dimensions, easily exceeding seven meters in length.
It didn't stir and seemed to be sleeping on the surface of the waves,
a circumstance that should have made it easier to capture.
The skiff approached cautiously to within three fathoms of the animal.
The oars hung suspended above their rowlocks. I was crouching.
His body leaning slightly back, Ned Land brandished his harpoon
with expert hands.
Suddenly a hissing sound was audible, and the dugong disappeared.
Although the harpoon had been forcefully hurled, it apparently
had hit only water.
"Damnation!" exclaimed the furious Canadian. "I missed it!"
"No," I said, "the animal's wounded, there's its blood; but your
weapon didn't stick in its body."
"My harpoon! Get my harpoon!" Ned Land exclaimed.
The sailors went back to their sculling, and the coxswain steered
the longboat toward the floating barrel. We fished up the harpoon,
and the skiff started off in pursuit of the animal.
The latter returned from time to time to breathe at the surface
of the sea. Its wound hadn't weakened it because it went with
tremendous speed. Driven by energetic arms, the longboat flew
on its trail. Several times we got within a few fathoms of it,
and the Canadian hovered in readiness to strike; but then the dugong
would steal away with a sudden dive, and it proved impossible
to overtake the beast.
I'll let you assess the degree of anger consuming our impatient
Ned Land. He hurled at the hapless animal the most potent swearwords
in the English language. For my part, I was simply distressed
to see this dugong outwit our every scheme.
We chased it unflaggingly for a full hour, and I'd begun to think it would
prove too difficult to capture, when the animal got the untimely idea
of taking revenge on us, a notion it would soon have cause to regret.
It wheeled on the skiff, to assault us in its turn.
This maneuver did not escape the Canadian.
"Watch out!" he said.
198
The coxswain pronounced a few words in his bizarre language,
and no doubt he alerted his men to keep on their guard.
Arriving within twenty feet of the skiff, the dugong stopped,
sharply sniffing the air with its huge nostrils, pierced not at
the tip of its muzzle but on its topside. Then it gathered itself
and sprang at us.
The skiff couldn't avoid the collision. Half overturned,
it shipped a ton or two of water that we had to bail out.
But thanks to our skillful coxswain, we were fouled on the bias rather
than broadside, so we didn't capsize. Clinging to the stempost,
Ned Land thrust his harpoon again and again into the gigantic animal,
which imbedded its teeth in our gunwale and lifted the longboat
out of the water as a lion would lift a deer. We were thrown on
top of each other, and I have no idea how the venture would have
ended had not the Canadian, still thirsting for the beast's blood,
finally pierced it to the heart.
I heard its teeth grind on sheet iron, and the dugong disappeared,
taking our harpoon along with it. But the barrel soon popped up
on the surface, and a few moments later the animal's body appeared
and rolled over on its back. Our skiff rejoined it, took it in tow,
and headed to the Nautilus.
It took pulleys of great strength to hoist this dugong onto the platform.
The beast weighed 5,000 kilograms. It was carved up in sight of
the Canadian, who remained to watch every detail of the operation.
At dinner the same day, my steward served me some slices of this flesh,
skillfully dressed by the ship's cook. I found it excellent,
even better than veal if not beef.
The next morning, February 11, the Nautilus's pantry was
enriched by more dainty game. A covey of terns alighted on
the Nautilus. They were a species of Sterna nilotica unique to Egypt:
beak black, head gray and stippled, eyes surrounded by white dots,
back, wings, and tail grayish, belly and throat white, feet red.
Also caught were a couple dozen Nile duck, superior-tasting wildfowl
whose neck and crown of the head are white speckled with black.
By then the Nautilus had reduced speed. It moved ahead at a saunter,
so to speak. I observed that the Red Sea's water was becoming less
salty the closer we got to Suez.
Near five o'clock in the afternoon, we sighted Cape Ras Mohammed
to the north. This cape forms the tip of Arabia Petraea, which lies
between the Gulf of Suez and the Gulf of Aqaba.
The Nautilus entered the Strait of Jubal, which leads to the Gulf
of Suez. I could clearly make out a high mountain crowning Ras Mohammed
between the two gulfs. It was Mt. Horeb, that biblical Mt. Sinai on
whose summit Moses met God face to face, that summit the mind's
eye always pictures as wreathed in lightning.
At six o'clock, sometimes afloat and sometimes submerged, the Nautilus
passed well out from El Tur, which sat at the far end of a bay whose
waters seemed to be dyed red, as Captain Nemo had already mentioned.
Then night fell in the midst of a heavy silence occasionally broken
by the calls of pelicans and nocturnal birds, by the sound of surf
199
chafing against rocks, or by the distant moan of a steamer churning
the waves of the gulf with noisy blades.
From eight to nine o'clock, the Nautilus stayed a few meters
beneath the waters. According to my calculations, we had
to be quite close to Suez. Through the panels in the lounge,
I spotted rocky bottoms brightly lit by our electric rays.
It seemed to me that the strait was getting narrower and narrower.
At 9:15 when our boat returned to the surface, I climbed onto
the platform. I was quite impatient to clear Captain Nemo's tunnel,
couldn't sit still, and wanted to breathe the fresh night air.
Soon, in the shadows, I spotted a pale signal light glimmering
a mile away, half discolored by mist.
"A floating lighthouse," said someone next to me.
I turned and discovered the captain.
"That's the floating signal light of Suez," he went on.
"It won't be long before we reach the entrance to the tunnel."
"It can't be very easy to enter it."
"No, sir. Accordingly, I'm in the habit of staying in the pilothouse
and directing maneuvers myself. And now if you'll kindly go below,
Professor Aronnax, the Nautilus is about to sink beneath the waves,
and it will only return to the surface after we've cleared
the Arabian Tunnel."
I followed Captain Nemo. The hatch closed, the ballast tanks filled
with water, and the submersible sank some ten meters down.
Just as I was about to repair to my stateroom, the captain stopped me.
"Professor," he said to me, "would you like to go with me
to the wheelhouse?"
"I was afraid to ask," I replied.
"Come along, then. This way, you'll learn the full story about this
combination underwater and underground navigating."
Captain Nemo led me to the central companionway. In midstair
he opened a door, went along the upper gangways, and arrived at
the wheelhouse, which, as you know, stands at one end of the platform.
It was a cabin measuring six feet square and closely resembling
those occupied by the helmsmen of steamboats on the Mississippi
or Hudson rivers. In the center stood an upright wheel
geared to rudder cables running to the Nautilus's stern.
Set in the cabin's walls were four deadlights, windows of biconvex
glass that enabled the man at the helm to see in every direction.
The cabin was dark; but my eyes soon grew accustomed to its darkness
and I saw the pilot, a muscular man whose hands rested on the pegs
of the wheel. Outside, the sea was brightly lit by the beacon
shining behind the cabin at the other end of the platform.
200
"Now," Captain Nemo said, "let's look for our passageway."
Electric wires linked the pilothouse with the engine room,
and from this cabin the captain could simultaneously signal heading
and speed to his Nautilus. He pressed a metal button and at once
the propeller slowed down significantly.
I stared in silence at the high, sheer wall we were skirting just then,
the firm base of the sandy mountains on the coast. For an hour we
went along it in this fashion, staying only a few meters away.
Captain Nemo never took his eyes off the two concentric circles
of the compass hanging in the cabin. At a mere gesture from him,
the helmsman would instantly change the Nautilus's heading.
Standing by the port deadlight, I spotted magnificent coral substructures,
zoophytes, algae, and crustaceans with enormous quivering claws
that stretched forth from crevices in the rock.
At 10:15 Captain Nemo himself took the helm. Dark and deep, a wide
gallery opened ahead of us. The Nautilus was brazenly swallowed up.
Strange rumblings were audible along our sides. It was the water
of the Red Sea, hurled toward the Mediterranean by the tunnel's slope.
Our engines tried to offer resistance by churning the waves
with propeller in reverse, but the Nautilus went with the torrent,
as swift as an arrow.
Along the narrow walls of this passageway, I saw only brilliant streaks,
hard lines, fiery furrows, all scrawled by our speeding electric light.
With my hand I tried to curb the pounding of my heart.
At 10:35 Captain Nemo left the steering wheel and turned to me:
"The Mediterranean," he told me.
In less than twenty minutes, swept along by the torrent, the Nautilus
had just cleared the Isthmus of Suez.
201
CHAPTER 6
The Greek Islands
AT SUNRISE the next morning, February 12, the Nautilus rose
to the surface of the waves.
I rushed onto the platform. The hazy silhouette of Pelusium was
outlined three miles to the south. A torrent had carried us from
one sea to the other. But although that tunnel was easy to descend,
going back up must have been impossible.
Near seven o'clock Ned and Conseil joined me. Those two inseparable
companions had slept serenely, utterly unaware of the Nautilus's feat.
"Well, Mr. Naturalist," the Canadian asked in a gently mocking tone,
"and how about that Mediterranean?"
"We're floating on its surface, Ned my friend."
"What!" Conseil put in. "Last night . . . ?"
"Yes, last night, in a matter of minutes, we cleared
that insuperable isthmus."
"I don't believe a word of it," the Canadian replied.
"And you're in the wrong, Mr. Land," I went on. "That flat coastline
curving southward is the coast of Egypt."
"Tell it to the marines, sir," answered the stubborn Canadian.
"But if master says so," Conseil told him, "then so be it."
"What's more, Ned," I said, "Captain Nemo himself did the honors
in his tunnel, and I stood beside him in the pilothouse while
he steered the Nautilus through that narrow passageway."
"You hear, Ned?" Conseil said.
"And you, Ned, who have such good eyes," I added, "you can spot
the jetties of Port Said stretching out to sea."
The Canadian looked carefully.
"Correct," he said. "You're right, professor, and your captain's
a superman. We're in the Mediterranean. Fine. So now let's have
a chat about our little doings, if you please, but in such a way
that nobody overhears."
I could easily see what the Canadian was driving at. In any event,
I thought it best to let him have his chat, and we all three went
to sit next to the beacon, where we were less exposed to the damp
spray from the billows.
"Now, Ned, we're all ears," I said. "What have you to tell us?"
"What I've got to tell you is very simple," the Canadian replied.
"We're in Europe, and before Captain Nemo's whims take us deep into
202
the polar seas or back to Oceania, I say we should leave this Nautilus."
I confess that such discussions with the Canadian always baffled me.
I didn't want to restrict my companions' freedom in any way,
and yet I had no desire to leave Captain Nemo. Thanks to him
and his submersible, I was finishing my undersea research by
the day, and I was rewriting my book on the great ocean depths
in the midst of its very element. Would I ever again have such
an opportunity to observe the ocean's wonders? Absolutely not!
So I couldn't entertain this idea of leaving the Nautilus before
completing our course of inquiry.
"Ned my friend," I said, "answer me honestly. Are you bored
with this ship? Are you sorry that fate has cast you into
Captain Nemo's hands?"
The Canadian paused for a short while before replying.
Then, crossing his arms:
"Honestly," he said, "I'm not sorry about this voyage under the seas.
I'll be glad to have done it, but in order to have done it,
it has to finish. That's my feeling."
"It will finish, Ned."
"Where and when?"
"Where? I don't know. When? I can't say. Or, rather, I suppose
it will be over when these seas have nothing more to teach us.
Everything that begins in this world must inevitably come to an end."
"I think as master does," Conseil replied, "and it's extremely
possible that after crossing every sea on the globe, Captain Nemo
will bid the three of us a fond farewell."
"Bid us a fond farewell?" the Canadian exclaimed. "You mean beat
us to a fare-thee-well!"
"Let's not exaggerate, Mr. Land," I went on. "We have nothing
to fear from the captain, but neither do I share Conseil's views.
We're privy to the Nautilus's secrets, and I don't expect that
its commander, just to set us free, will meekly stand by while we
spread those secrets all over the world."
"But in that case what do you expect?" the Canadian asked.
"That we'll encounter advantageous conditions for escaping just
as readily in six months as now."
"Great Scott!" Ned Land put in. "And where, if you please,
will we be in six months, Mr. Naturalist?"
"Perhaps here, perhaps in China. You know how quickly the
Nautilus moves. It crosses oceans like swallows cross the air or
express trains continents. It doesn't fear heavily traveled seas.
Who can say it won't hug the coasts of France, England, or America,
where an escape attempt could be carried out just as effectively as here."
"Professor Aronnax," the Canadian replied, "your arguments
are rotten to the core. You talk way off in the future:
203
'We'll be here, we'll be there!' Me, I'm talking about right now:
we are here, and we must take advantage of it!"
I was hard pressed by Ned Land's common sense, and I felt myself
losing ground. I no longer knew what arguments to put forward
on my behalf.
"Sir," Ned went on, "let's suppose that by some impossibility,
Captain Nemo offered your freedom to you this very day.
Would you accept?"
"I don't know," I replied.
"And suppose he adds that this offer he's making you today won't
ever be repeated, then would you accept?"
I did not reply.
"And what thinks our friend Conseil?" Ned Land asked.
"Your friend Conseil," the fine lad replied serenely, "has nothing to say
for himself. He's a completely disinterested party on this question.
Like his master, like his comrade Ned, he's a bachelor.
Neither wife, parents, nor children are waiting for him back home.
He's in master's employ, he thinks like master, he speaks like master,
and much to his regret, he can't be counted on to form a majority.
Only two persons face each other here: master on one side,
Ned Land on the other. That said, your friend Conseil is listening,
and he's ready to keep score."
I couldn't help smiling as Conseil wiped himself out of existence.
Deep down, the Canadian must have been overjoyed at not having
to contend with him.
"Then, sir," Ned Land said, "since Conseil is no more, we'll have this
discussion between just the two of us. I've talked, you've listened.
What's your reply?"
It was obvious that the matter had to be settled, and evasions
were distasteful to me.
"Ned my friend," I said, "here's my reply. You have right
on your side and my arguments can't stand up to yours.
It will never do to count on Captain Nemo's benevolence.
The most ordinary good sense would forbid him to set us free.
On the other hand, good sense decrees that we take advantage of our
first opportunity to leave the Nautilus."
"Fine, Professor Aronnax, that's wisely said."
"But one proviso," I said, "just one. The opportunity must
be the real thing. Our first attempt to escape must succeed,
because if it misfires, we won't get a second chance, and Captain Nemo
will never forgive us."
"That's also well put," the Canadian replied. "But your proviso applies
to any escape attempt, whether it happens in two years or two days.
So this is still the question: if a promising opportunity comes up,
we have to grab it."
204
"Agreed. And now, Ned, will you tell me what you mean by
a promising opportunity?"
"One that leads the Nautilus on a cloudy night within a short
distance of some European coast."
"And you'll try to get away by swimming?"
"Yes, if we're close enough to shore and the ship's afloat on
the surface. No, if we're well out and the ship's navigating
under the waters."
"And in that event?"
"In that event I'll try to get hold of the skiff. I know how to
handle it. We'll stick ourselves inside, undo the bolts, and rise
to the surface, without the helmsman in the bow seeing a thing."
"Fine, Ned. Stay on the lookout for such an opportunity,
but don't forget, one slipup will finish us."
"I won't forget, sir."
"And now, Ned, would you like to know my overall thinking on your plan?"
"Gladly, Professor Aronnax."
"Well then, I think--and I don't mean 'I hope'--that your promising
opportunity won't ever arise."
"Why not?"
"Because Captain Nemo recognizes that we haven't given up all
hope of recovering our freedom, and he'll keep on his guard,
above all in seas within sight of the coasts of Europe."
"I'm of master's opinion," Conseil said.
"We'll soon see," Ned Land replied, shaking his head with
a determined expression.
"And now, Ned Land," I added, "let's leave it at that. Not another word
on any of this. The day you're ready, alert us and we're with you.
I turn it all over to you."
That's how we ended this conversation, which later was to have
such serious consequences. At first, I must say, events seemed
to confirm my forecasts, much to the Canadian's despair.
Did Captain Nemo view us with distrust in these heavily traveled seas,
or did he simply want to hide from the sight of those ships
of every nation that plowed the Mediterranean? I have no idea,
but usually he stayed in midwater and well out from any coast.
Either the Nautilus surfaced only enough to let its pilothouse emerge,
or it slipped away to the lower depths, although, between the
Greek Islands and Asia Minor, we didn't find bottom even at
2,000 meters down.
Accordingly, I became aware of the isle of Karpathos, one of
the Sporades Islands, only when Captain Nemo placed his finger
over a spot on the world map and quoted me this verse from Virgil:
205
Est in Carpathio Neptuni gurgite vates
Caeruleus Proteus . . .*
*Latin: "There in King Neptune's domain by Karpathos, his spokesman
/ is azure-hued Proteus . . . " Ed.
It was indeed that bygone abode of Proteus, the old shepherd of
King Neptune's flocks: an island located between Rhodes and Crete,
which Greeks now call Karpathos, Italians Scarpanto. Through the lounge
window I could see only its granite bedrock.
The next day, February 14, I decided to spend a few hours studying
the fish of this island group; but for whatever reason, the panels
remained hermetically sealed. After determining the Nautilus's heading,
I noted that it was proceeding toward the ancient island of Crete,
also called Candia. At the time I had shipped aboard the Abraham Lincoln,
this whole island was in rebellion against its tyrannical rulers,
the Ottoman Empire of Turkey. But since then I had absolutely no idea
what happened to this revolution, and Captain Nemo, deprived of all
contact with the shore, was hardly the man to keep me informed.
So I didn't allude to this event when, that evening, I chanced to be
alone with the captain in the lounge. Besides, he seemed silent
and preoccupied. Then, contrary to custom, he ordered that both
panels in the lounge be opened, and going from the one to the other,
he carefully observed the watery mass. For what purpose?
I hadn't a guess, and for my part, I spent my time studying the fish
that passed before my eyes.
Among others I noted that sand goby mentioned by Aristotle and commonly
known by the name sea loach, which is encountered exclusively in the salty
waters next to the Nile Delta. Near them some semiphosphorescent red
porgy rolled by, a variety of gilthead that the Egyptians ranked among
their sacred animals, lauding them in religious ceremonies when their
arrival in the river's waters announced the fertile flood season.
I also noticed some wrasse known as the tapiro, three decimeters long,
bony fish with transparent scales whose bluish gray color is mixed
with red spots; they're enthusiastic eaters of marine vegetables,
which gives them an exquisite flavor; hence these tapiro were much
in demand by the epicures of ancient Rome, and their entrails
were dressed with brains of peacock, tongue of flamingo,
and testes of moray to make that divine platter that so enraptured
the Roman emperor Vitellius.
Another resident of these seas caught my attention and revived
all my memories of antiquity. This was the remora, which travels
attached to the bellies of sharks; as the ancients tell it,
when these little fish cling to the undersides of a ship, they can
bring it to a halt, and by so impeding
Mark Antony's vessel during the Battle of Actium, one of them facilitated
the victory of Augustus Caesar. From such slender threads hang
the destinies of nations! I also observed some wonderful snappers
belonging to the order Lutianida, sacred fish for the Greeks, who claimed
they could drive off sea monsters from the waters they frequent;
their Greek name anthias means "flower," and they live up to it
in the play of their colors and in those fleeting reflections that
turn their dorsal fins into watered silk; their hues are confined
206
to a gamut of reds, from the pallor of pink to the glow of ruby.
I couldn't take my eyes off these marine wonders, when I was suddenly
jolted by an unexpected apparition.
In the midst of the waters, a man appeared, a diver carrying a little
leather bag at his belt. It was no corpse lost in the waves.
It was a living man, swimming vigorously, sometimes disappearing
to breathe at the surface, then instantly diving again.
I turned to Captain Nemo, and in an agitated voice:
"A man! A castaway!" I exclaimed. "We must rescue him at all cost!"
The captain didn't reply but went to lean against the window.
The man drew near, and gluing his face to the panel, he stared at us.
To my deep astonishment, Captain Nemo gave him a signal.
The diver answered with his hand, immediately swam up to the surface
of the sea, and didn't reappear.
"Don't be alarmed," the captain told me. "That's Nicolas from
Cape Matapan, nicknamed 'Il Pesce.'* He's well known throughout
the Cyclades Islands. A bold diver! Water is his true element,
and he lives in the sea more than on shore, going constantly from
one island to another, even to Crete."
*Italian: "The Fish." Ed.
"You know him, captain?"
"Why not, Professor Aronnax?"
This said, Captain Nemo went to a cabinet standing near the lounge's
left panel. Next to this cabinet I saw a chest bound with hoops
of iron, its lid bearing a copper plaque that displayed the Nautilus's
monogram with its motto Mobilis in Mobili.
Just then, ignoring my presence, the captain opened this cabinet,
a sort of safe that contained a large number of ingots.
They were gold ingots. And they represented an enormous sum of money.
Where had this precious metal come from? How had the captain
amassed this gold, and what was he about to do with it?
I didn't pronounce a word. I gaped. Captain Nemo took out the ingots
one by one and arranged them methodically inside the chest, filling it
to the top. At which point I estimate that it held more than 1,000
kilograms of gold, in other words, close to 5,000,000 francs.
After securely fastening the chest, Captain Nemo wrote an address
on its lid in characters that must have been modern Greek.
This done, the captain pressed a button whose wiring was in
communication with the crew's quarters. Four men appeared and,
not without difficulty, pushed the chest out of the lounge.
Then I heard them hoist it up the iron companionway by means of pulleys.
Just then Captain Nemo turned to me:
207
"You were saying, professor?" he asked me.
"I wasn't saying a thing, captain."
"Then, sir, with your permission, I'll bid you good evening."
And with that, Captain Nemo left the lounge.
I reentered my stateroom, very puzzled, as you can imagine.
I tried in vain to fall asleep. I kept searching for a relationship
between the appearance of the diver and that chest filled with gold.
Soon, from certain rolling and pitching movements, I sensed that
the Nautilus had left the lower strata and was back on the surface
of the water.
Then I heard the sound of footsteps on the platform.
I realized that the skiff was being detached and launched to sea.
For an instant it bumped the Nautilus's side, then all sounds ceased.
Two hours later, the same noises, the same comings and goings,
were repeated. Hoisted on board, the longboat was readjusted into
its socket, and the Nautilus plunged back beneath the waves.
So those millions had been delivered to their address. At what spot
on the continent? Who was the recipient of Captain Nemo's gold?
The next day I related the night's events to Conseil and the Canadian,
events that had aroused my curiosity to a fever pitch.
My companions were as startled as I was.
"But where does he get those millions?" Ned Land asked.
To this no reply was possible. After breakfast I made my way
to the lounge and went about my work. I wrote up my notes until
five o'clock in the afternoon. Just then--was it due to some
personal indisposition?--I felt extremely hot and had to take off
my jacket made of fan mussel fabric. A perplexing circumstance
because we weren't in the low latitudes, and besides, once the Nautilus
was submerged, it shouldn't be subject to any rise in temperature.
I looked at the pressure gauge. It marked a depth of sixty feet,
a depth beyond the reach of atmospheric heat.
I kept on working, but the temperature rose to the point
of becoming unbearable.
"Could there be a fire on board?" I wondered.
I was about to leave the lounge when Captain Nemo entered.
He approached the thermometer, consulted it, and turned to me:
"42 degrees centigrade," he said.
"I've detected as much, captain," I replied, "and if it gets even
slightly hotter, we won't be able to stand it."
"Oh, professor, it won't get any hotter unless we want it to!"
"You mean you can control this heat?"
"No, but I can back away from the fireplace producing it."
208
"So it's outside?"
"Surely. We're cruising in a current of boiling water."
"It can't be!" I exclaimed.
"Look."
The panels had opened, and I could see a completely white
sea around the Nautilus. Steaming sulfurous fumes uncoiled
in the midst of waves bubbling like water in a boiler.
I leaned my hand against one of the windows, but the heat was so great,
I had to snatch it back.
"Where are we?" I asked.
"Near the island of Santorini, professor," the captain answered me,
"and right in the channel that separates the volcanic islets
of Nea Kameni and Palea Kameni. I wanted to offer you the unusual
sight of an underwater eruption."
"I thought," I said, "that the formation of such new islands had
come to an end."
"Nothing ever comes to an end in these volcanic waterways,"
Captain Nemo replied, "and thanks to its underground fires,
our globe is continuously under construction in these regions.
According to the Latin historians Cassiodorus and Pliny, by the year
19 of the Christian era, a new island, the divine Thera, had already
appeared in the very place these islets have more recently formed.
Then Thera sank under the waves, only to rise and sink once more
in the year 69 A.D. From that day to this, such plutonic construction
work has been in abeyance. But on February 3, 1866, a new islet
named George Island emerged in the midst of sulfurous steam near
Nea Kameni and was fused to it on the 6th of the same month.
Seven days later, on February 13, the islet of Aphroessa appeared,
leaving a ten-meter channel between itself and Nea Kameni. I was
in these seas when that phenomenon occurred and I was able to observe
its every phase. The islet of Aphroessa was circular in shape,
measuring 300 feet in diameter and thirty feet in height.
It was made of black, glassy lava mixed with bits of feldspar.
Finally, on March 10, a smaller islet called Reka appeared next to
Nea Kameni, and since then, these three islets have fused to form
one single, selfsame island."
"What about this channel we're in right now?" I asked.
"Here it is," Captain Nemo replied, showing me a chart of the
Greek Islands. "You observe that I've entered the new islets
in their place."
"But will this channel fill up one day?"
"Very likely, Professor Aronnax, because since 1866 eight little
lava islets have surged up in front of the port of St. Nicolas
on Palea Kameni. So it's obvious that Nea and Palea will join
in days to come. In the middle of the Pacific, tiny infusoria
build continents, but here they're built by volcanic phenomena.
Look, sir! Look at the construction work going on under these waves."
209
I returned to the window. The Nautilus was no longer moving.
The heat had become unbearable. From the white it had recently been,
the sea was turning red, a coloration caused by the presence
of iron salts. Although the lounge was hermetically sealed, it was
filling with an intolerable stink of sulfur, and I could see scarlet
flames of such brightness, they overpowered our electric light.
I was swimming in perspiration, I was stifling, I was about to be cooked.
Yes, I felt myself cooking in actual fact!
"We can't stay any longer in this boiling water," I told the captain.
"No, it wouldn't be advisable," replied Nemo the Emotionless.
He gave an order. The Nautilus tacked about and retreated from this
furnace it couldn't brave with impunity. A quarter of an hour later,
we were breathing fresh air on the surface of the waves.
It then occurred to me that if Ned had chosen these waterways
for our escape attempt, we wouldn't have come out alive from this
sea of fire.
The next day, February 16, we left this basin, which tallies depths
of 3,000 meters between Rhodes and Alexandria, and passing well out
from Cerigo Island after doubling Cape Matapan, the Nautilus left
the Greek Islands behind.
210
CHAPTER 7
The Mediterranean in Forty-Eight Hours
THE MEDITERRANEAN, your ideal blue sea: to Greeks simply "the sea,"
to Hebrews "the great sea," to Romans mare nostrum.* Bordered
by orange trees, aloes, cactus, and maritime pine trees,
perfumed with the scent of myrtle, framed by rugged mountains,
saturated with clean, transparent air but continuously under
construction by fires in the earth, this sea is a genuine battlefield
where Neptune and Pluto still struggle for world domination.
Here on these beaches and waters, says the French historian Michelet,
a man is revived by one of the most invigorating climates in the world.
*Latin: "our sea." Ed.
But as beautiful as it was, I could get only a quick look at this
basin whose surface area comprises 2,000,000 square kilometers.
Even Captain Nemo's personal insights were denied me,
because that mystifying individual didn't appear one single time
during our high-speed crossing. I estimate that the Nautilus
covered a track of some 600 leagues under the waves of this sea,
and this voyage was accomplished in just twenty-four hours times two.
Departing from the waterways of Greece on the morning of February 16,
we cleared the Strait of Gibraltar by sunrise on the 18th.
It was obvious to me that this Mediterranean, pinned in the middle
of those shores he wanted to avoid, gave Captain Nemo no pleasure.
Its waves and breezes brought back too many memories, if not too
many regrets. Here he no longer had the ease of movement and freedom
of maneuver that the oceans allowed him, and his Nautilus felt
cramped so close to the coasts of both Africa and Europe.
Accordingly, our speed was twenty-five miles (that is,
twelve four-kilometer leagues) per hour. Needless to say,
Ned Land had to give up his escape plans, much to his distress.
Swept along at the rate of twelve to thirteen meters per second,
he could hardly make use of the skiff. Leaving the Nautilus
under these conditions would have been like jumping off a train
racing at this speed, a rash move if there ever was one.
Moreover, to renew our air supply, the submersible rose to the surface
of the waves only at night, and relying solely on compass and log,
it steered by dead reckoning.
Inside the Mediterranean, then, I could catch no more of
its fast-passing scenery than a traveler might see from an
express train; in other words, I could view only the distant
horizons because the foregrounds flashed by like lightning.
But Conseil and I were able to observe those Mediterranean fish
whose powerful fins kept pace for a while in the Nautilus's waters.
We stayed on watch before the lounge windows, and our notes enable
me to reconstruct, in a few words, the ichthyology of this sea.
Among the various fish inhabiting it, some I viewed, others I glimpsed,
and the rest I missed completely because of the Nautilus's speed.
Kindly allow me to sort them out using this whimsical system
of classification. It will at least convey the quickness
of my observations.
211
In the midst of the watery mass, brightly lit by our electric beams,
there snaked past those one-meter lampreys that are common
to nearly every clime. A type of ray from the genus Oxyrhynchus,
five feet wide, had a white belly with a spotted, ash-gray back
and was carried along by the currents like a huge, wide-open shawl.
Other rays passed by so quickly I couldn't tell if they deserved that
name "eagle ray" coined by the ancient Greeks, or those designations
of "rat ray," "bat ray," and "toad ray" that modern fishermen
have inflicted on them. Dogfish known as topes, twelve feet long
and especially feared by divers, were racing with each other.
Looking like big bluish shadows, thresher sharks went by,
eight feet long and gifted with an extremely acute sense of smell.
Dorados from the genus Sparus, some measuring up to thirteen
decimeters, appeared in silver and azure costumes encircled
with ribbons, which contrasted with the dark color of their fins;
fish sacred to the goddess Venus, their eyes set in brows of gold;
a valuable species that patronizes all waters fresh or salt,
equally at home in rivers, lakes, and oceans, living in every clime,
tolerating any temperature, their line dating back to prehistoric times
on this earth yet preserving all its beauty from those far-off days.
Magnificent sturgeons, nine to ten meters long and extremely fast,
banged their powerful tails against the glass of our panels,
showing bluish backs with small brown spots; they resemble sharks,
without equaling their strength, and are encountered in every sea;
in the spring they delight in swimming up the great rivers,
fighting the currents of the Volga, Danube, Po, Rhine, Loire, and Oder,
while feeding on herring, mackerel, salmon, and codfish; although they
belong to the class of cartilaginous fish, they rate as a delicacy;
they're eaten fresh, dried, marinated, or salt-preserved,
and in olden times they were borne in triumph to the table of
the Roman epicure Lucullus.
But whenever the Nautilus drew near the surface, those denizens
of the Mediterranean I could observe most productively belonged
to the sixty-third genus of bony fish. These were tuna from
the genus Scomber, blue-black on top, silver on the belly armor,
their dorsal stripes giving off a golden gleam. They are said to
follow ships in search of refreshing shade from the hot tropical sun,
and they did just that with the Nautilus, as they had once done
with the vessels of the Count de La Pérouse. For long hours they
competed in speed with our submersible. I couldn't stop marveling
at these animals so perfectly cut out for racing, their heads small,
their bodies sleek, spindle-shaped, and in some cases over three
meters long, their pectoral fins gifted with remarkable strength,
their caudal fins forked. Like certain flocks of birds, whose speed
they equal, these tuna swim in triangle formation, which prompted
the ancients to say they'd boned up on geometry and military strategy.
And yet they can't escape the Provençal fishermen, who prize them
as highly as did the ancient inhabitants of Turkey and Italy;
and these valuable animals, as oblivious as if they were deaf
and blind, leap right into the Marseilles tuna nets and perish
by the thousands.
Just for the record, I'll mention those Mediterranean fish
that Conseil and I barely glimpsed. There were whitish eels
of the species Gymnotus fasciatus that passed like elusive wisps
of steam, conger eels three to four meters long that were tricked
out in green, blue, and yellow, three-foot hake with a liver
that makes a dainty morsel, wormfish drifting like thin seaweed,
sea robins that poets call lyrefish and seamen pipers and whose snouts
212
have two jagged triangular plates shaped like old Homer's lyre,
swallowfish swimming as fast as the bird they're named after,
redheaded groupers whose dorsal fins are trimmed with filaments,
some shad (spotted with black, gray, brown, blue, yellow, and green)
that actually respond to tinkling handbells, splendid diamond-shaped
turbot that were like aquatic pheasants with yellowish fins stippled
in brown and the left topside mostly marbled in brown and yellow,
finally schools of wonderful red mullet, real oceanic birds of paradise
that ancient Romans bought for as much as 10,000 sesterces apiece,
and which they killed at the table, so they could heartlessly watch it
change color from cinnabar red when alive to pallid white when dead.
And as for other fish common to the Atlantic and Mediterranean, I was
unable to observe miralets, triggerfish, puffers, seahorses,
jewelfish, trumpetfish, blennies, gray mullet, wrasse, smelt,
flying fish, anchovies, sea bream, porgies, garfish, or any of
the chief representatives of the order Pleuronecta, such as sole,
flounder, plaice, dab, and brill, simply because of the dizzying
speed with which the Nautilus hustled through these opulent waters.
As for marine mammals, on passing by the mouth of the Adriatic Sea, I
thought I recognized two or three sperm whales equipped with the single
dorsal fin denoting the genus Physeter, some pilot whales from
the genus Globicephalus exclusive to the Mediterranean, the forepart
of the head striped with small distinct lines, and also a dozen
seals with white bellies and black coats, known by the name monk
seals and just as solemn as if they were three-meter Dominicans.
For his part, Conseil thought he spotted a turtle six feet wide
and adorned with three protruding ridges that ran lengthwise.
I was sorry to miss this reptile, because from Conseil's description,
I believe I recognized the leatherback turtle, a pretty rare species.
For my part, I noted only some loggerhead turtles with long carapaces.
As for zoophytes, for a few moments I was able to marvel at a wonderful,
orange-hued hydra from the genus Galeolaria that clung to the glass
of our port panel; it consisted of a long, lean filament that spread
out into countless branches and ended in the most delicate lace
ever spun by the followers of Arachne. Unfortunately I couldn't
fish up this wonderful specimen, and surely no other Mediterranean
zoophytes would have been offered to my gaze, if, on the evening
of the 16th, the Nautilus hadn't slowed down in an odd fashion.
This was the situation.
By then we were passing between Sicily and the coast
of Tunisia. In the cramped space between Cape Bon and the
Strait of Messina, the sea bottom rises almost all at once.
It forms an actual ridge with only seventeen meters of water
remaining above it, while the depth on either side is 170 meters.
Consequently, the Nautilus had to maneuver with caution so as not
to bump into this underwater barrier.
I showed Conseil the position of this long reef on our chart
of the Mediterranean.
"But with all due respect to master," Conseil ventured to observe,
"it's like an actual isthmus connecting Europe to Africa."
"Yes, my boy," I replied, "it cuts across the whole Strait of Sicily,
and Smith's soundings prove that in the past, these two continents
213
were genuinely connected between Cape Boeo and Cape Farina."
"I can easily believe it," Conseil said.
"I might add," I went on, "that there's a similar barrier between
Gibraltar and Ceuta, and in prehistoric times it closed off
the Mediterranean completely."
"Gracious!" Conseil put in. "Suppose one day some volcanic upheaval
raises these two barriers back above the waves!"
"That's most unlikely, Conseil."
"If master will allow me to finish, I mean that if this phenomenon occurs,
it might prove distressing to Mr. de Lesseps, who has gone to such
pains to cut through his isthmus!"
"Agreed, but I repeat, Conseil: such a phenomenon won't occur.
The intensity of these underground forces continues to diminish.
Volcanoes were quite numerous in the world's early days, but they're
going extinct one by one; the heat inside the earth is growing weaker,
the temperature in the globe's lower strata is cooling appreciably
every century, and to our globe's detriment, because its heat
is its life."
"But the sun--"
"The sun isn't enough, Conseil. Can it restore heat to a corpse?"
"Not that I've heard."
"Well, my friend, someday the earth will be just such a cold corpse.
Like the moon, which long ago lost its vital heat, our globe will
become lifeless and unlivable."
"In how many centuries?" Conseil asked.
"In hundreds of thousands of years, my boy."
"Then we have ample time to finish our voyage," Conseil replied,
"if Ned Land doesn't mess things up!"
Thus reassured, Conseil went back to studying the shallows that
the Nautilus was skimming at moderate speed.
On the rocky, volcanic seafloor, there bloomed quite a collection
of moving flora: sponges, sea cucumbers, jellyfish called sea
gooseberries that were adorned with reddish tendrils and gave off
a subtle phosphorescence, members of the genus Beroe that are commonly
known by the name melon jellyfish and are bathed in the shimmer
of the whole solar spectrum, free-swimming crinoids one meter wide
that reddened the waters with their crimson hue, treelike basket
stars of the greatest beauty, sea fans from the genus Pavonacea
with long stems, numerous edible sea urchins of various species,
plus green sea anemones with a grayish trunk and a brown disk lost
beneath the olive-colored tresses of their tentacles.
Conseil kept especially busy observing mollusks and articulates,
and although his catalog is a little dry, I wouldn't want to wrong
the gallant lad by leaving out his personal observations.
214
From the branch Mollusca, he mentions numerous comb-shaped scallops,
hooflike spiny oysters piled on top of each other, triangular coquina,
three-pronged glass snails with yellow fins and transparent shells,
orange snails from the genus Pleurobranchus that looked like eggs spotted
or speckled with greenish dots, members of the genus Aplysia also known
by the name sea hares, other sea hares from the genus Dolabella,
plump paper-bubble shells, umbrella shells exclusive to the Mediterranean,
abalone whose shell produces a mother-of-pearl much in demand,
pilgrim scallops, saddle shells that diners in the French
province of Languedoc are said to like better than oysters,
some of those cockleshells so dear to the citizens of Marseilles,
fat white venus shells that are among the clams so abundant off
the coasts of North America and eaten in such quantities by New Yorkers,
variously colored comb shells with gill covers, burrowing date
mussels with a peppery flavor I relish, furrowed heart cockles whose
shells have riblike ridges on their arching summits, triton shells
pocked with scarlet bumps, carniaira snails with backward-curving
tips that make them resemble flimsy gondolas, crowned ferola snails,
atlanta snails with spiral shells, gray nudibranchs from the genus
Tethys that were spotted with white and covered by fringed mantles,
nudibranchs from the suborder Eolidea that looked like small slugs,
sea butterflies crawling on their backs, seashells from the genus Auricula
including the oval-shaped Auricula myosotis, tan wentletrap snails,
common periwinkles, violet snails, cineraira snails, rock borers,
ear shells, cabochon snails, pandora shells, etc.
As for the articulates, in his notes Conseil has very appropriately
divided them into six classes, three of which belong to the marine world.
These classes are the Crustacea, Cirripedia, and Annelida.
Crustaceans are subdivided into nine orders, and the first of
these consists of the decapods, in other words, animals whose head
and thorax are usually fused, whose cheek-and-mouth mechanism is
made up of several pairs of appendages, and whose thorax has four,
five, or six pairs of walking legs. Conseil used the methods
of our mentor Professor Milne-Edwards, who puts the decapods
in three divisions: Brachyura, Macrura, and Anomura. These names
may look a tad fierce, but they're accurate and appropriate.
Among the Brachyura, Conseil mentions some amanthia crabs whose fronts
were armed with two big diverging tips, those inachus scorpions that--
lord knows why--symbolized wisdom to the ancient Greeks, spider crabs
of the massena and spinimane varieties that had probably gone astray
in these shallows because they usually live in the lower depths,
xanthid crabs, pilumna crabs, rhomboid crabs, granular box crabs
(easy on the digestion, as Conseil ventured to observe), toothless
masked crabs, ebalia crabs, cymopolia crabs, woolly-handed crabs, etc.
Among the Macrura (which are subdivided into five families:
hardshells, burrowers, crayfish, prawns, and ghost crabs)
Conseil mentions some common spiny lobsters whose females supply a meat
highly prized, slipper lobsters or common shrimp, waterside gebia shrimp,
and all sorts of edible species, but he says nothing of the crayfish
subdivision that includes the true lobster, because spiny lobsters
are the only type in the Mediterranean. Finally, among the Anomura,
he saw common drocina crabs dwelling inside whatever abandoned
seashells they could take over, homola crabs with spiny fronts,
hermit crabs, hairy porcelain crabs, etc.
There Conseil's work came to a halt. He didn't have time to finish
off the class Crustacea through an examination of its stomatopods,
215
amphipods, homopods, isopods, trilobites, branchiopods, ostracods,
and entomostraceans. And in order to complete his study of
marine articulates, he needed to mention the class Cirripedia,
which contains water fleas and carp lice, plus the class Annelida,
which he would have divided without fail into tubifex worms and
dorsibranchian worms. But having gone past the shallows of the Strait
of Sicily, the Nautilus resumed its usual deep-water speed.
From then on, no more mollusks, no more zoophytes, no more articulates.
Just a few large fish sweeping by like shadows.
During the night of February 16-17, we entered the second
Mediterranean basin, whose maximum depth we found at 3,000 meters.
The Nautilus, driven downward by its propeller and slanting fins,
descended to the lowest strata of this sea.
There, in place of natural wonders, the watery mass offered
some thrilling and dreadful scenes to my eyes. In essence,
we were then crossing that part of the whole Mediterranean so fertile
in casualties. From the coast of Algiers to the beaches of Provence,
how many ships have wrecked, how many vessels have vanished!
Compared to the vast liquid plains of the Pacific, the Mediterranean
is a mere lake, but it's an unpredictable lake with fickle waves,
today kindly and affectionate to those frail single-masters drifting
between a double ultramarine of sky and water, tomorrow bad-tempered
and turbulent, agitated by the winds, demolishing the strongest
ships beneath sudden waves that smash down with a headlong wallop.
So, in our swift cruise through these deep strata, how many vessels I
saw lying on the seafloor, some already caked with coral, others clad
only in a layer of rust, plus anchors, cannons, shells, iron fittings,
propeller blades, parts of engines, cracked cylinders, staved-in boilers,
then hulls floating in midwater, here upright, there overturned.
Some of these wrecked ships had perished in collisions, others from
hitting granite reefs. I saw a few that had sunk straight down,
their masting still upright, their rigging stiffened by the water.
They looked like they were at anchor by some immense, open,
offshore mooring where they were waiting for their departure time.
When the Nautilus passed between them, covering them with sheets
of electricity, they seemed ready to salute us with their colors
and send us their serial numbers! But no, nothing but silence
and death filled this field of catastrophes!
I observed that these Mediterranean depths became more and more
cluttered with such gruesome wreckage as the Nautilus drew nearer
to the Strait of Gibraltar. By then the shores of Africa and Europe
were converging, and in this narrow space collisions were commonplace.
There I saw numerous iron undersides, the phantasmagoric ruins
of steamers, some lying down, others rearing up like fearsome animals.
One of these boats made a dreadful first impression:
sides torn open, funnel bent, paddle wheels stripped to the mountings,
rudder separated from the sternpost and still hanging from an
iron chain, the board on its stern eaten away by marine salts!
How many lives were dashed in this shipwreck! How many victims
were swept under the waves! Had some sailor on board lived
to tell the story of this dreadful disaster, or do the waves still
keep this casualty a secret? It occurred to me, lord knows why,
that this boat buried under the sea might have been the Atlas,
lost with all hands some twenty years ago and never heard from again!
Oh, what a gruesome tale these Mediterranean depths could tell,
216
this huge boneyard where so much wealth has been lost, where so many
victims have met their deaths!
Meanwhile, briskly unconcerned, the Nautilus ran at full propeller
through the midst of these ruins. On February 18, near three o'clock
in the morning, it hove before the entrance to the Strait of Gibraltar.
There are two currents here: an upper current, long known to exist,
that carries the ocean's waters into the Mediterranean basin;
then a lower countercurrent, the only present-day proof of its existence
being logic. In essence, the Mediterranean receives a continual influx
of water not only from the Atlantic but from rivers emptying into it;
since local evaporation isn't enough to restore the balance, the total
amount of added water should make this sea's level higher every year.
Yet this isn't the case, and we're naturally forced to believe in
the existence of some lower current that carries the Mediterranean's
surplus through the Strait of Gibraltar and into the Atlantic basin.
And so it turned out. The Nautilus took full advantage of
this countercurrent. It advanced swiftly through this narrow passageway.
For an instant I could glimpse the wonderful ruins of the Temple
of Hercules, buried undersea, as Pliny and Avianus have mentioned,
together with the flat island they stand on; and a few minutes later,
we were floating on the waves of the Atlantic.
217
CHAPTER 8
The Bay of Vigo
THE ATLANTIC! A vast expanse of water whose surface area is 25,000,000
square miles, with a length of 9,000 miles and an average width
of 2,700. A major sea nearly unknown to the ancients, except perhaps
the Carthaginians, those Dutchmen of antiquity who went along
the west coasts of Europe and Africa on their commercial junkets!
An ocean whose parallel winding shores form an immense perimeter
fed by the world's greatest rivers: the St. Lawrence, Mississippi,
Amazon, Plata, Orinoco, Niger, Senegal, Elbe, Loire, and Rhine,
which bring it waters from the most civilized countries as well
as the most undeveloped areas! A magnificent plain of waves plowed
continuously by ships of every nation, shaded by every flag in the world,
and ending in those two dreadful headlands so feared by navigators,
Cape Horn and the Cape of Tempests!
The Nautilus broke these waters with the edge of its spur after
doing nearly 10,000 leagues in three and a half months, a track
longer than a great circle of the earth. Where were we heading now,
and what did the future have in store for us?
Emerging from the Strait of Gibraltar, the Nautilus took to the
high seas. It returned to the surface of the waves, so our daily
strolls on the platform were restored to us.
I climbed onto it instantly, Ned Land and Conseil along with me.
Twelve miles away, Cape St. Vincent was hazily visible, the southwestern
tip of the Hispanic peninsula. The wind was blowing a pretty
strong gust from the south. The sea was swelling and surging.
Its waves made the Nautilus roll and jerk violently.
It was nearly impossible to stand up on the platform,
which was continuously buffeted by this enormously heavy sea.
After inhaling a few breaths of air, we went below once more.
I repaired to my stateroom. Conseil returned to his cabin;
but the Canadian, looking rather worried, followed me. Our quick
trip through the Mediterranean hadn't allowed him to put his plans
into execution, and he could barely conceal his disappointment.
After the door to my stateroom was closed, he sat and stared
at me silently.
"Ned my friend," I told him, "I know how you feel, but you mustn't
blame yourself. Given the way the Nautilus was navigating,
it would have been sheer insanity to think of escaping!"
Ned Land didn't reply. His pursed lips and frowning brow indicated
that he was in the grip of his monomania.
"Look here," I went on, "as yet there's no cause for despair.
We're going up the coast of Portugal. France and England aren't
far off, and there we'll easily find refuge. Oh, I grant you,
if the Nautilus had emerged from the Strait of Gibraltar and made
for that cape in the south, if it were taking us toward those
regions that have no continents, then I'd share your alarm.
But we now know that Captain Nemo doesn't avoid the seas of civilization,
and in a few days I think we can safely take action."
218
Ned Land stared at me still more intently and finally unpursed his lips:
"We'll do it this evening," he said.
I straightened suddenly. I admit that I was less than ready
for this announcement. I wanted to reply to the Canadian,
but words failed me.
"We agreed to wait for the right circumstances," Ned Land went on.
"Now we've got those circumstances. This evening we'll be just
a few miles off the coast of Spain. It'll be cloudy tonight.
The wind's blowing toward shore. You gave me your promise,
Professor Aronnax, and I'm counting on you."
Since I didn't say anything, the Canadian stood up and approached me:
"We'll do it this evening at nine o'clock," he said.
"I've alerted Conseil. By that time Captain Nemo will be locked in his
room and probably in bed. Neither the mechanics or the crewmen will be
able to see us. Conseil and I will go to the central companionway.
As for you, Professor Aronnax, you'll stay in the library two
steps away and wait for my signal. The oars, mast, and sail are
in the skiff. I've even managed to stow some provisions inside.
I've gotten hold of a monkey wrench to unscrew the nuts bolting
the skiff to the Nautilus's hull. So everything's ready.
I'll see you this evening."
"The sea is rough," I said.
"Admitted," the Canadian replied, "but we've got to risk it.
Freedom is worth paying for. Besides, the longboat's solidly built,
and a few miles with the wind behind us is no big deal.
By tomorrow, who knows if this ship won't be 100 leagues out to sea?
If circumstances are in our favor, between ten and eleven this evening
we'll be landing on some piece of solid ground, or we'll be dead.
So we're in God's hands, and I'll see you this evening!"
This said, the Canadian withdrew, leaving me close to dumbfounded.
I had imagined that if it came to this, I would have time to think
about it, to talk it over. My stubborn companion hadn't granted
me this courtesy. But after all, what would I have said to him?
Ned Land was right a hundred times over. These were near-ideal
circumstances, and he was taking full advantage of them.
In my selfish personal interests, could I go back on my word
and be responsible for ruining the future lives of my companions?
Tomorrow, might not Captain Nemo take us far away from any shore?
Just then a fairly loud hissing told me that the ballast tanks
were filling, and the Nautilus sank beneath the waves of the Atlantic.
I stayed in my stateroom. I wanted to avoid the captain, to hide from
his eyes the agitation overwhelming me. What an agonizing day I spent,
torn between my desire to regain my free will and my regret at abandoning
this marvelous Nautilus, leaving my underwater research incomplete!
How could I relinquish this ocean--"my own Atlantic," as I liked
to call it--without observing its lower strata, without wresting
from it the kinds of secrets that had been revealed to me by the seas
of the East Indies and the Pacific! I was putting down my novel
half read, I was waking up as my dream neared its climax!
219
How painfully the hours passed, as I sometimes envisioned myself
safe on shore with my companions, or, despite my better judgment,
as I sometimes wished that some unforeseen circumstances would
prevent Ned Land from carrying out his plans.
Twice I went to the lounge. I wanted to consult the compass.
I wanted to see if the Nautilus's heading was actually taking
us closer to the coast or spiriting us farther away. But no.
The Nautilus was still in Portuguese waters. Heading north,
it was cruising along the ocean's beaches.
So I had to resign myself to my fate and get ready to escape.
My baggage wasn't heavy. My notes, nothing more.
As for Captain Nemo, I wondered what he would make of our escaping,
what concern or perhaps what distress it might cause him, and what
he would do in the twofold event of our attempt either failing or being
found out! Certainly I had no complaints to register with him,
on the contrary. Never was hospitality more wholehearted than his.
Yet in leaving him I couldn't be accused of ingratitude.
No solemn promises bound us to him. In order to keep us captive,
he had counted only on the force of circumstances and not on our
word of honor. But his avowed intention to imprison us forever
on his ship justified our every effort.
I hadn't seen the captain since our visit to the island of Santorini.
Would fate bring me into his presence before our departure?
I both desired and dreaded it. I listened for footsteps
in the stateroom adjoining mine. Not a sound reached my ear.
His stateroom had to be deserted.
Then I began to wonder if this eccentric individual was even on board.
Since that night when the skiff had left the Nautilus on some
mysterious mission, my ideas about him had subtly changed.
In spite of everything, I thought that Captain Nemo must
have kept up some type of relationship with the shore.
Did he himself never leave the Nautilus? Whole weeks had often gone
by without my encountering him. What was he doing all the while?
During all those times I'd thought he was convalescing in the grip
of some misanthropic fit, was he instead far away from the ship,
involved in some secret activity whose nature still eluded me?
All these ideas and a thousand others assaulted me at the same time.
In these strange circumstances the scope for conjecture was unlimited.
I felt an unbearable queasiness. This day of waiting seemed endless.
The hours struck too slowly to keep up with my impatience.
As usual, dinner was served me in my stateroom. Full of anxiety,
I ate little. I left the table at seven o'clock. 120 minutes--
I was keeping track of them--still separated me from the
moment I was to rejoin Ned Land. My agitation increased.
My pulse was throbbing violently. I couldn't stand still.
I walked up and down, hoping to calm my troubled mind with movement.
The possibility of perishing in our reckless undertaking was the least
of my worries; my heart was pounding at the thought that our plans
might be discovered before we had left the Nautilus, at the thought
of being hauled in front of Captain Nemo and finding him angered,
or worse, saddened by my deserting him.
I wanted to see the lounge one last time. I went down the gangways
220
and arrived at the museum where I had spent so many pleasant and
productive hours. I stared at all its wealth, all its treasures, like a
man on the eve of his eternal exile, a man departing to return no more.
For so many days now, these natural wonders and artistic masterworks had
been central to my life, and I was about to leave them behind forever.
I wanted to plunge my eyes through the lounge window and into
these Atlantic waters; but the panels were hermetically sealed,
and a mantle of sheet iron separated me from this ocean with which I
was still unfamiliar.
Crossing through the lounge, I arrived at the door, contrived in one
of the canted corners, that opened into the captain's stateroom.
Much to my astonishment, this door was ajar. I instinctively recoiled.
If Captain Nemo was in his stateroom, he might see me.
But, not hearing any sounds, I approached. The stateroom was deserted.
I pushed the door open. I took a few steps inside.
Still the same austere, monastic appearance.
Just then my eye was caught by some etchings hanging on the wall,
which I hadn't noticed during my first visit. They were portraits
of great men of history who had spent their lives in perpetual
devotion to a great human ideal: Thaddeus Kosciusko, the hero
whose dying words had been Finis Poloniae;* Markos Botzaris,
for modern Greece the reincarnation of Sparta's King Leonidas;
Daniel O'Connell, Ireland's defender; George Washington,
founder of the American Union; Daniele Manin, the Italian patriot;
Abraham Lincoln, dead from the bullet of a believer in slavery;
and finally, that martyr for the redemption of the black race,
John Brown, hanging from his gallows as Victor Hugo's pencil has
so terrifyingly depicted.
*Latin: "Save Poland's borders." Ed.
What was the bond between these heroic souls and the soul
of Captain Nemo? From this collection of portraits could I
finally unravel the mystery of his existence? Was he a fighter
for oppressed peoples, a liberator of enslaved races? Had he figured
in the recent political or social upheavals of this century?
Was he a hero of that dreadful civil war in America, a war lamentable
yet forever glorious . . . ?
Suddenly the clock struck eight. The first stroke of its hammer
on the chime snapped me out of my musings. I shuddered as if some
invisible eye had plunged into my innermost thoughts, and I rushed
outside the stateroom.
There my eyes fell on the compass. Our heading was still northerly.
The log indicated a moderate speed, the pressure gauge a depth of about
sixty feet. So circumstances were in favor of the Canadian's plans.
I stayed in my stateroom. I dressed warmly: fishing boots, otter cap,
coat of fan-mussel fabric lined with sealskin. I was ready.
I was waiting. Only the propeller's vibrations disturbed the deep
silence reigning on board. I cocked an ear and listened.
Would a sudden outburst of voices tell me that Ned Land's escape plans
had just been detected? A ghastly uneasiness stole through me.
I tried in vain to recover my composure.
A few minutes before nine o'clock, I glued my ear to the captain's door.
Not a sound. I left my stateroom and returned to the lounge,
221
which was deserted and plunged in near darkness.
I opened the door leading to the library. The same inadequate light,
the same solitude. I went to man my post near the door opening into
the well of the central companionway. I waited for Ned Land's signal.
At this point the propeller's vibrations slowed down appreciably,
then they died out altogether. Why was the Nautilus stopping?
Whether this layover would help or hinder Ned Land's schemes I
couldn't have said.
The silence was further disturbed only by the pounding of my heart.
Suddenly I felt a mild jolt. I realized the Nautilus had come
to rest on the ocean floor. My alarm increased. The Canadian's
signal hadn't reached me. I longed to rejoin Ned Land and urge him
to postpone his attempt. I sensed that we were no longer navigating
under normal conditions.
Just then the door to the main lounge opened and Captain Nemo appeared.
He saw me, and without further preamble:
"Ah, professor," he said in an affable tone, "I've been looking for you.
Do you know your Spanish history?"
Even if he knew it by heart, a man in my disturbed, befuddled condition
couldn't have quoted a syllable of his own country's history.
"Well?" Captain Nemo went on. "Did you hear my question?
Do you know the history of Spain?"
"Very little of it," I replied.
"The most learned men," the captain said, "still have much to learn.
Have a seat," he added, "and I'll tell you about an unusual episode
in this body of history."
The captain stretched out on a couch, and I mechanically took a seat
near him, but half in the shadows.
"Professor," he said, "listen carefully. This piece of history
concerns you in one definite respect, because it will answer
a question you've no doubt been unable to resolve."
"I'm listening, captain," I said, not knowing what my partner
in this dialogue was driving at, and wondering if this incident
related to our escape plans.
"Professor," Captain Nemo went on, "if you're amenable, we'll go
back in time to 1702. You're aware of the fact that in those days
your King Louis XIV thought an imperial gesture would suffice
to humble the Pyrenees in the dust, so he inflicted his grandson,
the Duke of Anjou, on the Spaniards. Reigning more or less
poorly under the name King Philip V, this aristocrat had to deal
with mighty opponents abroad.
"In essence, the year before, the royal houses of Holland, Austria,
and England had signed a treaty of alliance at The Hague, aiming to
wrest the Spanish crown from King Philip V and to place it on the head
of an archduke whom they prematurely dubbed King Charles III.
222
"Spain had to withstand these allies. But the country had practically no
army or navy. Yet it wasn't short of money, provided that its galleons,
laden with gold and silver from America, could enter its ports.
Now then, late in 1702 Spain was expecting a rich convoy,
which France ventured to escort with a fleet of twenty-three vessels
under the command of Admiral de Chateau-Renault, because by that time
the allied navies were roving the Atlantic.
"This convoy was supposed to put into Cadiz, but after learning
that the English fleet lay across those waterways, the admiral
decided to make for a French port.
"The Spanish commanders in the convoy objected to this decision.
They wanted to be taken to a Spanish port, if not to Cadiz,
then to the Bay of Vigo, located on Spain's northwest coast
and not blockaded.
"Admiral de Chateau-Renault was so indecisive as to obey this directive,
and the galleons entered the Bay of Vigo.
"Unfortunately this bay forms an open, offshore mooring that's
impossible to defend. So it was essential to hurry and empty
the galleons before the allied fleets arrived, and there would
have been ample time for this unloading, if a wretched question
of trade agreements hadn't suddenly come up.
"Are you clear on the chain of events?" Captain Nemo asked me.
"Perfectly clear," I said, not yet knowing why I was being given
this history lesson.
"Then I'll continue. Here's what came to pass. The tradesmen
of Cadiz had negotiated a charter whereby they were to receive all
merchandise coming from the West Indies. Now then, unloading the
ingots from those galleons at the port of Vigo would have been
a violation of their rights. So they lodged a complaint in Madrid,
and they obtained an order from the indecisive King Philip V:
without unloading, the convoy would stay in custody at the offshore
mooring of Vigo until the enemy fleets had retreated.
"Now then, just as this decision was being handed down, English vessels
arrived in the Bay of Vigo on October 22, 1702. Despite his
inferior forces, Admiral de Chateau-Renault fought courageously.
But when he saw that the convoy's wealth was about to fall into
enemy hands, he burned and scuttled the galleons, which went
to the bottom with their immense treasures."
Captain Nemo stopped. I admit it: I still couldn't see how this
piece of history concerned me.
"Well?" I asked him.
"Well, Professor Aronnax," Captain Nemo answered me, "we're actually
in that Bay of Vigo, and all that's left is for you to probe
the mysteries of the place."
The captain stood up and invited me to follow him. I'd had time
to collect myself. I did so. The lounge was dark, but the sea's
223
waves sparkled through the transparent windows. I stared.
Around the Nautilus for a half-mile radius, the waters seemed saturated
with electric light. The sandy bottom was clear and bright.
Dressed in diving suits, crewmen were busy clearing away half-rotted
barrels and disemboweled trunks in the midst of the dingy hulks of ships.
Out of these trunks and kegs spilled ingots of gold and silver,
cascades of jewels, pieces of eight. The sand was heaped with them.
Then, laden with these valuable spoils, the men returned to the Nautilus,
dropped off their burdens inside, and went to resume this inexhaustible
fishing for silver and gold.
I understood. This was the setting of that battle on October
22, 1702. Here, in this very place, those galleons carrying
treasure to the Spanish government had gone to the bottom.
Here, whenever he needed, Captain Nemo came to withdraw these
millions to ballast his Nautilus. It was for him, for him alone,
that America had yielded up its precious metals. He was the direct,
sole heir to these treasures wrested from the Incas and those peoples
conquered by Hernando Cortez!
"Did you know, professor," he asked me with a smile, "that the sea
contained such wealth?"
"I know it's estimated," I replied, "that there are 2,000,000 metric
tons of silver held in suspension in seawater."
"Surely, but in extracting that silver, your expenses would
outweigh your profits. Here, by contrast, I have only to pick up
what other men have lost, and not only in this Bay of Vigo but at
a thousand other sites where ships have gone down, whose positions
are marked on my underwater chart. Do you understand now that I'm
rich to the tune of billions?"
"I understand, captain. Nevertheless, allow me to inform you
that by harvesting this very Bay of Vigo, you're simply forestalling
the efforts of a rival organization."
"What organization?"
"A company chartered by the Spanish government to search for these
sunken galleons. The company's investors were lured by the bait
of enormous gains, because this scuttled treasure is estimated
to be worth 500,000,000 francs."
"It was 500,000,000 francs," Captain Nemo replied, "but no more!"
"Right," I said. "Hence a timely warning to those investors would
be an act of charity. Yet who knows if it would be well received?
Usually what gamblers regret the most isn't the loss of their money
so much as the loss of their insane hopes. But ultimately I feel
less sorry for them than for the thousands of unfortunate people
who would have benefited from a fair distribution of this wealth,
whereas now it will be of no help to them!"
No sooner had I voiced this regret than I felt it must have
wounded Captain Nemo.
"No help!" he replied with growing animation. "Sir, what makes you
assume this wealth goes to waste when I'm the one amassing it?
224
Do you think I toil to gather this treasure out of selfishness?
Who says I don't put it to good use? Do you think I'm unaware
of the suffering beings and oppressed races living on this earth,
poor people to comfort, victims to avenge? Don't you understand . . . ?"
Captain Nemo stopped on these last words, perhaps sorry that he had said
too much. But I had guessed. Whatever motives had driven him to seek
independence under the seas, he remained a human being before all else!
His heart still throbbed for suffering humanity, and his immense
philanthropy went out both to downtrodden races and to individuals!
And now I knew where Captain Nemo had delivered those millions,
when the Nautilus navigated the waters where Crete was in rebellion
against the Ottoman Empire!
225
CHAPTER 9
A Lost Continent
THE NEXT MORNING, February 19, I beheld the Canadian entering
my stateroom. I was expecting this visit. He wore an expression
of great disappointment.
"Well, sir?" he said to me.
"Well, Ned, the fates were against us yesterday."
"Yes! That damned captain had to call a halt just as we were going
to escape from his boat."
"Yes, Ned, he had business with his bankers."
"His bankers?"
"Or rather his bank vaults. By which I mean this ocean, where his
wealth is safer than in any national treasury."
I then related the evening's incidents to the Canadian, secretly hoping
he would come around to the idea of not deserting the captain;
but my narrative had no result other than Ned's voicing deep regret
that he hadn't strolled across the Vigo battlefield on his own behalf.
"Anyhow," he said, "it's not over yet! My first harpoon missed,
that's all! We'll succeed the next time, and as soon as this evening,
if need be . . ."
"What's the Nautilus's heading?" I asked.
"I've no idea," Ned replied.
"All right, at noon we'll find out what our position is!"
The Canadian returned to Conseil's side. As soon as I was dressed,
I went into the lounge. The compass wasn't encouraging.
The Nautilus's course was south-southwest. We were turning our
backs on Europe.
I could hardly wait until our position was reported on the chart.
Near 11:30 the ballast tanks emptied, and the submersible rose
to the surface of the ocean. I leaped onto the platform.
Ned Land was already there.
No more shore in sight. Nothing but the immenseness of the sea.
A few sails were on the horizon, no doubt ships going as far
as Cape São Roque to find favorable winds for doubling the Cape
of Good Hope. The sky was overcast. A squall was on the way.
Furious, Ned tried to see through the mists on the horizon.
He still hoped that behind all that fog there lay those shores
he longed for.
At noon the sun made a momentary appearance. Taking advantage of this
rift in the clouds, the chief officer took the orb's altitude.
Then the sea grew turbulent, we went below again, and the hatch
226
closed once more.
When I consulted the chart an hour later, I saw that the Nautilus's
position was marked at longitude 16 degrees 17' and latitude
33 degrees 22', a good 150 leagues from the nearest coast.
It wouldn't do to even dream of escaping, and I'll let the reader
decide how promptly the Canadian threw a tantrum when I ventured
to tell him our situation.
As for me, I wasn't exactly grief-stricken. I felt as if a heavy
weight had been lifted from me, and I was able to resume my regular
tasks in a state of comparative calm.
Near eleven o'clock in the evening, I received a most unexpected
visit from Captain Nemo. He asked me very graciously if I felt
exhausted from our vigil the night before. I said no.
"Then, Professor Aronnax, I propose an unusual excursion."
"Propose away, captain."
"So far you've visited the ocean depths only by day and under sunlight.
Would you like to see these depths on a dark night?"
"Very much."
"I warn you, this will be an exhausting stroll. We'll need to walk
long hours and scale a mountain. The roads aren't terribly
well kept up."
"Everything you say, captain, just increases my curiosity.
I'm ready to go with you."
"Then come along, professor, and we'll go put on our diving suits."
Arriving at the wardrobe, I saw that neither my companions
nor any crewmen would be coming with us on this excursion.
Captain Nemo hadn't even suggested my fetching Ned or Conseil.
In a few moments we had put on our equipment. Air tanks,
abundantly charged, were placed on our backs, but the electric lamps
were not in readiness. I commented on this to the captain.
"They'll be useless to us," he replied.
I thought I hadn't heard him right, but I couldn't repeat
my comment because the captain's head had already disappeared
into its metal covering. I finished harnessing myself, I felt
an alpenstock being placed in my hand, and a few minutes later,
after the usual procedures, we set foot on the floor of the Atlantic,
300 meters down.
Midnight was approaching. The waters were profoundly dark,
but Captain Nemo pointed to a reddish spot in the distance, a sort
of wide glow shimmering about two miles from the Nautilus. What this
fire was, what substances fed it, how and why it kept burning
in the liquid mass, I couldn't say. Anyhow it lit our way,
although hazily, but I soon grew accustomed to this unique gloom,
and in these circumstances I understood the uselessness of
the Ruhmkorff device.
227
Side by side, Captain Nemo and I walked directly toward this
conspicuous flame. The level seafloor rose imperceptibly.
We took long strides, helped by our alpenstocks; but in general
our progress was slow, because our feet kept sinking into a kind
of slimy mud mixed with seaweed and assorted flat stones.
As we moved forward, I heard a kind of pitter-patter above my head.
Sometimes this noise increased and became a continuous crackle.
I soon realized the cause. It was a heavy rainfall rattling
on the surface of the waves. Instinctively I worried that I
might get soaked! By water in the midst of water! I couldn't
help smiling at this outlandish notion. But to tell the truth,
wearing these heavy diving suits, you no longer feel the liquid element,
you simply think you're in the midst of air a little denser than air
on land, that's all.
After half an hour of walking, the seafloor grew rocky.
Jellyfish, microscopic crustaceans, and sea-pen coral lit it faintly
with their phosphorescent glimmers. I glimpsed piles of stones
covered by a couple million zoophytes and tangles of algae.
My feet often slipped on this viscous seaweed carpet,
and without my alpenstock I would have fallen more than once.
When I turned around, I could still see the Nautilus's whitish beacon,
which was starting to grow pale in the distance.
Those piles of stones just mentioned were laid out on the ocean floor
with a distinct but inexplicable symmetry. I spotted gigantic furrows
trailing off into the distant darkness, their length incalculable.
There also were other peculiarities I couldn't make sense of.
It seemed to me that my heavy lead soles were crushing a litter
of bones that made a dry crackling noise. So what were these vast
plains we were now crossing? I wanted to ask the captain, but I still
didn't grasp that sign language that allowed him to chat with his
companions when they went with him on his underwater excursions.
Meanwhile the reddish light guiding us had expanded and inflamed
the horizon. The presence of this furnace under the waters had me
extremely puzzled. Was it some sort of electrical discharge?
Was I approaching some natural phenomenon still unknown
to scientists on shore? Or, rather (and this thought did
cross my mind), had the hand of man intervened in that blaze?
Had human beings fanned those flames? In these deep strata would
I meet up with more of Captain Nemo's companions, friends he was
about to visit who led lives as strange as his own? Would I find
a whole colony of exiles down here, men tired of the world's woes,
men who had sought and found independence in the ocean's lower depths?
All these insane, inadmissible ideas dogged me, and in this frame
of mind, continually excited by the series of wonders passing
before my eyes, I wouldn't have been surprised to find on this sea
bottom one of those underwater towns Captain Nemo dreamed about!
Our path was getting brighter and brighter. The red glow had turned
white and was radiating from a mountain peak about 800 feet high.
But what I saw was simply a reflection produced by the crystal
waters of these strata. The furnace that was the source of this
inexplicable light occupied the far side of the mountain.
In the midst of the stone mazes furrowing this Atlantic seafloor,
Captain Nemo moved forward without hesitation. He knew this dark path.
228
No doubt he had often traveled it and was incapable of losing his way.
I followed him with unshakeable confidence. He seemed like some
Spirit of the Sea, and as he walked ahead of me, I marveled at his
tall figure, which stood out in black against the glowing background
of the horizon.
It was one o'clock in the morning. We arrived at the mountain's
lower gradients. But in grappling with them, we had to venture up
difficult trails through a huge thicket.
Yes, a thicket of dead trees! Trees without leaves, without sap,
turned to stone by the action of the waters, and crowned here
and there by gigantic pines. It was like a still-erect coalfield,
its roots clutching broken soil, its boughs clearly outlined
against the ceiling of the waters like thin, black, paper cutouts.
Picture a forest clinging to the sides of a peak in the Harz Mountains,
but a submerged forest. The trails were cluttered with algae
and fucus plants, hosts of crustaceans swarming among them.
I plunged on, scaling rocks, straddling fallen tree trunks,
snapping marine creepers that swayed from one tree to another,
startling the fish that flitted from branch to branch.
Carried away, I didn't feel exhausted any more. I followed a guide
who was immune to exhaustion.
What a sight! How can I describe it! How can I portray these
woods and rocks in this liquid setting, their lower parts dark
and sullen, their upper parts tinted red in this light whose
intensity was doubled by the reflecting power of the waters!
We scaled rocks that crumbled behind us, collapsing in enormous
sections with the hollow rumble of an avalanche. To our right and left
there were carved gloomy galleries where the eye lost its way.
Huge glades opened up, seemingly cleared by the hand of man,
and I sometimes wondered whether some residents of these underwater
regions would suddenly appear before me.
But Captain Nemo kept climbing. I didn't want to fall behind.
I followed him boldly. My alpenstock was a great help.
One wrong step would have been disastrous on the narrow paths cut
into the sides of these chasms, but I walked along with a firm
tread and without the slightest feeling of dizziness. Sometimes I
leaped over a crevasse whose depth would have made me recoil had I
been in the midst of glaciers on shore; sometimes I ventured out on
a wobbling tree trunk fallen across a gorge, without looking down,
having eyes only for marveling at the wild scenery of this region.
There, leaning on erratically cut foundations, monumental rocks
seemed to defy the laws of balance. From between their stony knees,
trees sprang up like jets under fearsome pressure, supporting other
trees that supported them in turn. Next, natural towers with wide,
steeply carved battlements leaned at angles that, on dry land,
the laws of gravity would never have authorized.
And I too could feel the difference created by the water's
powerful density--despite my heavy clothing, copper headpiece,
and metal soles, I climbed the most impossibly steep gradients with all
the nimbleness, I swear it, of a chamois or a Pyrenees mountain goat!
As for my account of this excursion under the waters, I'm well aware
that it sounds incredible! I'm the chronicler of deeds seemingly
impossible and yet incontestably real. This was no fantasy.
This was what I saw and felt!
229
Two hours after leaving the Nautilus, we had cleared the timberline,
and 100 feet above our heads stood the mountain peak, forming a dark
silhouette against the brilliant glare that came from its far slope.
Petrified shrubs rambled here and there in sprawling zigzags. Fish rose
in a body at our feet like birds startled in tall grass. The rocky mass
was gouged with impenetrable crevices, deep caves, unfathomable holes
at whose far ends I could hear fearsome things moving around.
My blood would curdle as I watched some enormous antenna bar my path,
or saw some frightful pincer snap shut in the shadow of some cavity!
A thousand specks of light glittered in the midst of the gloom.
They were the eyes of gigantic crustaceans crouching in their lairs,
giant lobsters rearing up like spear carriers and moving their claws
with a scrap-iron clanking, titanic crabs aiming their bodies
like cannons on their carriages, and hideous devilfish intertwining
their tentacles like bushes of writhing snakes.
What was this astounding world that I didn't yet know?
In what order did these articulates belong, these creatures
for which the rocks provided a second carapace? Where had nature
learned the secret of their vegetating existence, and for how many
centuries had they lived in the ocean's lower strata?
But I couldn't linger. Captain Nemo, on familiar terms with
these dreadful animals, no longer minded them. We arrived at a
preliminary plateau where still other surprises were waiting for me.
There picturesque ruins took shape, betraying the hand of man,
not our Creator. They were huge stacks of stones in which you
could distinguish the indistinct forms of palaces and temples,
now arrayed in hosts of blossoming zoophytes, and over it all,
not ivy but a heavy mantle of algae and fucus plants.
But what part of the globe could this be, this land swallowed
by cataclysms? Who had set up these rocks and stones like the dolmens
of prehistoric times? Where was I, where had Captain Nemo's
fancies taken me?
I wanted to ask him. Unable to, I stopped him. I seized his arm.
But he shook his head, pointed to the mountain's topmost peak,
and seemed to tell me:
"Come on! Come with me! Come higher!"
I followed him with one last burst of energy, and in a few
minutes I had scaled the peak, which crowned the whole rocky mass
by some ten meters.
I looked back down the side we had just cleared. There the mountain rose
only 700 to 800 feet above the plains; but on its far slope it crowned
the receding bottom of this part of the Atlantic by a height twice that.
My eyes scanned the distance and took in a vast area lit by intense
flashes of light. In essence, this mountain was a volcano.
Fifty feet below its peak, amid a shower of stones and slag,
a wide crater vomited torrents of lava that were dispersed in
fiery cascades into the heart of the liquid mass. So situated,
this volcano was an immense torch that lit up the lower plains
all the way to the horizon.
As I said, this underwater crater spewed lava, but not flames.
Flames need oxygen from the air and are unable to spread underwater;
230
but a lava flow, which contains in itself the principle of its
incandescence, can rise to a white heat, overpower the liquid element,
and turn it into steam on contact. Swift currents swept away all this
diffuse gas, and torrents of lava slid to the foot of the mountain,
like the disgorgings of a Mt. Vesuvius over the city limits
of a second Torre del Greco.
In fact, there beneath my eyes was a town in ruins, demolished,
overwhelmed, laid low, its roofs caved in, its temples pulled down,
its arches dislocated, its columns stretching over the earth;
in these ruins you could still detect the solid proportions
of a sort of Tuscan architecture; farther off, the remains of a
gigantic aqueduct; here, the caked heights of an acropolis along
with the fluid forms of a Parthenon; there, the remnants of a wharf,
as if some bygone port had long ago harbored merchant vessels
and triple-tiered war galleys on the shores of some lost ocean;
still farther off, long rows of collapsing walls, deserted thoroughfares,
a whole Pompeii buried under the waters, which Captain Nemo had
resurrected before my eyes!
Where was I? Where was I? I had to find out at all cost, I wanted
to speak, I wanted to rip off the copper sphere imprisoning my head.
But Captain Nemo came over and stopped me with a gesture.
Then, picking up a piece of chalky stone, he advanced to a black
basaltic rock and scrawled this one word:
ATLANTIS
What lightning flashed through my mind! Atlantis, that ancient land
of Meropis mentioned by the historian Theopompus; Plato's Atlantis;
the continent whose very existence has been denied by such philosophers
and scientists as Origen, Porphyry, Iamblichus, d'Anville, Malte-Brun,
and Humboldt, who entered its disappearance in the ledger of myths
and folk tales; the country whose reality has nevertheless been accepted
by such other thinkers as Posidonius, Pliny, Ammianus Marcellinus,
Tertullian, Engel, Scherer, Tournefort, Buffon, and d'Avezac; I had
this land right under my eyes, furnishing its own unimpeachable
evidence of the catastrophe that had overtaken it! So this was
the submerged region that had existed outside Europe, Asia, and Libya,
beyond the Pillars of Hercules, home of those powerful Atlantean
people against whom ancient Greece had waged its earliest wars!
The writer whose narratives record the lofty deeds of those heroic
times is Plato himself. His dialogues Timaeus and Critias were
drafted with the poet and legislator Solon as their inspiration,
as it were.
One day Solon was conversing with some elderly wise men in the Egyptian
capital of Sais, a town already 8,000 years of age, as documented
by the annals engraved on the sacred walls of its temples. One of these
elders related the history of another town 1,000 years older still.
This original city of Athens, ninety centuries old, had been invaded
and partly destroyed by the Atlanteans. These Atlanteans, he said,
resided on an immense continent greater than Africa and
Asia combined, taking in an area that lay between latitude 12 degrees
and 40 degrees north. Their dominion extended even to Egypt. They tried
to enforce their rule as far as Greece, but they had to retreat before
the indomitable resistance of the Hellenic people. Centuries passed.
231
A cataclysm occurred--floods, earthquakes. A single night and day
were enough to obliterate this Atlantis, whose highest peaks
(Madeira, the Azores, the Canaries, the Cape Verde Islands)
still emerge above the waves.
These were the historical memories that Captain Nemo's scrawl sent
rushing through my mind. Thus, led by the strangest of fates,
I was treading underfoot one of the mountains of that continent!
My hands were touching ruins many thousands of years old,
contemporary with prehistoric times! I was walking in the very place
where contemporaries of early man had walked! My heavy soles
were crushing the skeletons of animals from the age of fable,
animals that used to take cover in the shade of these trees now
turned to stone!
Oh, why was I so short of time! I would have gone down the steep
slopes of this mountain, crossed this entire immense continent,
which surely connects Africa with America, and visited its great
prehistoric cities. Under my eyes there perhaps lay the warlike
town of Makhimos or the pious village of Eusebes, whose gigantic
inhabitants lived for whole centuries and had the strength to raise
blocks of stone that still withstood the action of the waters.
One day perhaps, some volcanic phenomenon will bring these sunken
ruins back to the surface of the waves! Numerous underwater volcanoes
have been sighted in this part of the ocean, and many ships have
felt terrific tremors when passing over these turbulent depths.
A few have heard hollow noises that announced some struggle of
the elements far below, others have hauled in volcanic ash hurled
above the waves. As far as the equator this whole seafloor is still
under construction by plutonic forces. And in some remote epoch,
built up by volcanic disgorgings and successive layers of lava,
who knows whether the peaks of these fire-belching mountains may
reappear above the surface of the Atlantic!
As I mused in this way, trying to establish in my memory every
detail of this impressive landscape, Captain Nemo was leaning
his elbows on a moss-covered monument, motionless as if petrified
in some mute trance. Was he dreaming of those lost generations,
asking them for the secret of human destiny? Was it here that this
strange man came to revive himself, basking in historical memories,
reliving that bygone life, he who had no desire for our modern one?
I would have given anything to know his thoughts, to share them,
understand them!
We stayed in this place an entire hour, contemplating its vast plains
in the lava's glow, which sometimes took on a startling intensity.
Inner boilings sent quick shivers running through the mountain's crust.
Noises from deep underneath, clearly transmitted by the liquid medium,
reverberated with majestic amplitude.
Just then the moon appeared for an instant through the watery mass,
casting a few pale rays over this submerged continent.
It was only a fleeting glimmer, but its effect was indescribable.
The captain stood up and took one last look at these immense plains;
then his hand signaled me to follow him.
We went swiftly down the mountain. Once past the petrified forest,
I could see the Nautilus's beacon twinkling like a star.
The captain walked straight toward it, and we were back on board
just as the first glimmers of dawn were whitening the surface
232
of the ocean.
233
CHAPTER 10
The Underwater Coalfields
THE NEXT DAY, February 20, I overslept. I was so exhausted
from the night before, I didn't get up until eleven o'clock. I
dressed quickly. I hurried to find out the Nautilus's heading.
The instruments indicated that it was running southward at a speed
of twenty miles per hour and a depth of 100 meters.
Conseil entered. I described our nocturnal excursion to him,
and since the panels were open, he could still catch a glimpse
of this submerged continent.
In fact, the Nautilus was skimming only ten meters over the soil of
these Atlantis plains. The ship scudded along like an air balloon borne
by the wind over some prairie on land; but it would be more accurate
to say that we sat in the lounge as if we were riding in a coach
on an express train. As for the foregrounds passing before our eyes,
they were fantastically carved rocks, forests of trees that had
crossed over from the vegetable kingdom into the mineral kingdom,
their motionless silhouettes sprawling beneath the waves.
There also were stony masses buried beneath carpets of axidia
and sea anemone, bristling with long, vertical water plants,
then strangely contoured blocks of lava that testified to all the fury
of those plutonic developments.
While this bizarre scenery was glittering under our electric beams,
I told Conseil the story of the Atlanteans, who had inspired
the old French scientist Jean Bailly to write so many entertaining--
albeit utterly fictitious--pages.* I told the lad about the wars
of these heroic people. I discussed the question of Atlantis
with the fervor of a man who no longer had any doubts. But Conseil
was so distracted he barely heard me, and his lack of interest
in any commentary on this historical topic was soon explained.
*Bailly believed that Atlantis was located at the North Pole! Ed.
In essence, numerous fish had caught his eye, and when fish pass by,
Conseil vanishes into his world of classifying and leaves real
life behind. In which case I could only tag along and resume
our ichthyological research.
Even so, these Atlantic fish were not noticeably different from those we
had observed earlier. There were rays of gigantic size, five meters
long and with muscles so powerful they could leap above the waves,
sharks of various species including a fifteen-foot glaucous shark
with sharp triangular teeth and so transparent it was almost invisible
amid the waters, brown lantern sharks, prism-shaped humantin sharks
armored with protuberant hides, sturgeons resembling their relatives
in the Mediterranean, trumpet-snouted pipefish a foot and a half long,
yellowish brown with small gray fins and no teeth or tongue,
unreeling like slim, supple snakes.
Among bony fish, Conseil noticed some blackish marlin three
meters long with a sharp sword jutting from the upper jaw,
bright-colored weevers known in Aristotle's day as sea dragons
and whose dorsal stingers make them quite dangerous to pick up,
then dolphinfish with brown backs striped in blue and edged in gold,
234
handsome dorados, moonlike opahs that look like azure disks but which
the sun's rays turn into spots of silver, finally eight-meter swordfish
from the genus Xiphias, swimming in schools, sporting yellowish
sickle-shaped fins and six-foot broadswords, stalwart animals,
plant eaters rather than fish eaters, obeying the tiniest signals
from their females like henpecked husbands.
But while observing these different specimens of marine fauna,
I didn't stop examining the long plains of Atlantis. Sometimes an
unpredictable irregularity in the seafloor would force the Nautilus
to slow down, and then it would glide into the narrow channels
between the hills with a cetacean's dexterity. If the labyrinth
became hopelessly tangled, the submersible would rise above it
like an airship, and after clearing the obstacle, it would resume
its speedy course just a few meters above the ocean floor.
It was an enjoyable and impressive way of navigating that did indeed
recall the maneuvers of an airship ride, with the major difference
that the Nautilus faithfully obeyed the hands of its helmsman.
The terrain consisted mostly of thick slime mixed with petrified branches,
but it changed little by little near four o'clock in the afternoon;
it grew rockier and seemed to be strewn with pudding stones and a basaltic
gravel called "tuff," together with bits of lava and sulfurous obsidian.
I expected these long plains to change into mountain regions,
and in fact, as the Nautilus was executing certain turns,
I noticed that the southerly horizon was blocked by a high wall
that seemed to close off every exit. Its summit obviously
poked above the level of the ocean. It had to be a continent
or at least an island, either one of the Canaries or one of the
Cape Verde Islands. Our bearings hadn't been marked on the chart--
perhaps deliberately--and I had no idea what our position was.
In any case this wall seemed to signal the end of Atlantis, of which,
all in all, we had crossed only a small part.
Nightfall didn't interrupt my observations. I was left to myself.
Conseil had repaired to his cabin. The Nautilus slowed down,
hovering above the muddled masses on the seafloor, sometimes grazing
them as if wanting to come to rest, sometimes rising unpredictably
to the surface of the waves. Then I glimpsed a few bright
constellations through the crystal waters, specifically five or six
of those zodiacal stars trailing from the tail end of Orion.
I would have stayed longer at my window, marveling at these beauties
of sea and sky, but the panels closed. Just then the Nautilus had
arrived at the perpendicular face of that high wall. How the ship
would maneuver I hadn't a guess. I repaired to my stateroom.
The Nautilus did not stir. I fell asleep with the firm intention
of waking up in just a few hours.
But it was eight o'clock the next day when I returned to the lounge.
I stared at the pressure gauge. It told me that the Nautilus was
afloat on the surface of the ocean. Furthermore, I heard the sound
of footsteps on the platform. Yet there were no rolling movements
to indicate the presence of waves undulating above me.
I climbed as far as the hatch. It was open. But instead of
the broad daylight I was expecting, I found that I was surrounded
by total darkness. Where were we? Had I been mistaken?
Was it still night? No! Not one star was twinkling, and nighttime
is never so utterly black.
235
I wasn't sure what to think, when a voice said to me:
"Is that you, professor?"
"Ah, Captain Nemo!" I replied. "Where are we?"
"Underground, professor."
"Underground!" I exclaimed. "And the Nautilus is still floating?"
"It always floats."
"But I don't understand!"
"Wait a little while. Our beacon is about to go on, and if you
want some light on the subject, you'll be satisfied."
I set foot on the platform and waited. The darkness was so profound
I couldn't see even Captain Nemo. However, looking at the zenith
directly overhead, I thought I caught sight of a feeble glimmer,
a sort of twilight filtering through a circular hole.
Just then the beacon suddenly went on, and its intense brightness
made that hazy light vanish.
This stream of electricity dazzled my eyes, and after momentarily
shutting them, I looked around. The Nautilus was stationary.
It was floating next to an embankment shaped like a wharf.
As for the water now buoying the ship, it was a lake completely encircled
by an inner wall about two miles in diameter, hence six miles around.
Its level--as indicated by the pressure gauge--would be the same
as the outside level, because some connection had to exist
between this lake and the sea. Slanting inward over their base,
these high walls converged to form a vault shaped like an immense
upside-down funnel that measured 500 or 600 meters in height.
At its summit there gaped the circular opening through which I
had detected that faint glimmer, obviously daylight.
Before more carefully examining the interior features of this
enormous cavern, and before deciding if it was the work of nature
or humankind, I went over to Captain Nemo.
"Where are we?" I said.
"In the very heart of an extinct volcano," the captain answered me,
"a volcano whose interior was invaded by the sea after some convulsion
in the earth. While you were sleeping, professor, the Nautilus
entered this lagoon through a natural channel that opens ten meters
below the surface of the ocean. This is our home port, secure,
convenient, secret, and sheltered against winds from any direction!
Along the coasts of your continents or islands, show me any
offshore mooring that can equal this safe refuge for withstanding
the fury of hurricanes."
"Indeed," I replied, "here you're in perfect safety,
Captain Nemo. Who could reach you in the heart of a volcano?
But don't I see an opening at its summit?"
"Yes, its crater, a crater formerly filled with lava, steam, and flames,
but which now lets in this life-giving air we're breathing."
236
"But which volcanic mountain is this?" I asked.
"It's one of the many islets with which this sea is strewn.
For ships a mere reef, for us an immense cavern. I discovered it
by chance, and chance served me well."
"But couldn't someone enter through the mouth of its crater?"
"No more than I could exit through it. You can climb about 100 feet
up the inner base of this mountain, but then the walls overhang,
they lean too far in to be scaled."
"I can see, captain, that nature is your obedient servant,
any time or any place. You're safe on this lake, and nobody else
can visit its waters. But what's the purpose of this refuge?
The Nautilus doesn't need a harbor."
"No, professor, but it needs electricity to run, batteries to
generate its electricity, sodium to feed its batteries, coal to
make its sodium, and coalfields from which to dig its coal.
Now then, right at this spot the sea covers entire forests that
sank underwater in prehistoric times; today, turned to stone,
transformed into carbon fuel, they offer me inexhaustible coal mines."
"So, captain, your men practice the trade of miners here?"
"Precisely. These mines extend under the waves like the coalfields
at Newcastle. Here, dressed in diving suits, pick and mattock in hand,
my men go out and dig this carbon fuel for which I don't need a single
mine on land. When I burn this combustible to produce sodium,
the smoke escaping from the mountain's crater gives it the appearance
of a still-active volcano."
"And will we see your companions at work?"
"No, at least not this time, because I'm eager to continue our
underwater tour of the world. Accordingly, I'll rest content
with drawing on my reserve stock of sodium. We'll stay here long
enough to load it on board, in other words, a single workday,
then we'll resume our voyage. So, Professor Aronnax, if you'd
like to explore this cavern and circle its lagoon, seize the day."
I thanked the captain and went to look for my two companions,
who hadn't yet left their cabin. I invited them to follow me,
not telling them where we were.
They climbed onto the platform. Conseil, whom nothing could startle,
saw it as a perfectly natural thing to fall asleep under the waves
and wake up under a mountain. But Ned Land had no idea in his head
other than to see if this cavern offered some way out.
After breakfast near ten o'clock, we went down onto the embankment.
"So here we are, back on shore," Conseil said.
"I'd hardly call this shore," the Canadian replied. "And besides,
we aren't on it but under it."
A sandy beach unfolded before us, measuring 500 feet at its widest point
237
between the waters of the lake and the foot of the mountain's walls.
Via this strand you could easily circle the lake. But the base
of these high walls consisted of broken soil over which there lay
picturesque piles of volcanic blocks and enormous pumice stones.
All these crumbling masses were covered with an enamel polished by
the action of underground fires, and they glistened under the stream
of electric light from our beacon. Stirred up by our footsteps,
the mica-rich dust on this beach flew into the air like a
cloud of sparks.
The ground rose appreciably as it moved away from the sand flats
by the waves, and we soon arrived at some long, winding gradients,
genuinely steep paths that allowed us to climb little by little;
but we had to tread cautiously in the midst of pudding stones that weren't
cemented together, and our feet kept skidding on glassy trachyte,
made of feldspar and quartz crystals.
The volcanic nature of this enormous pit was apparent all around us.
I ventured to comment on it to my companions.
"Can you picture," I asked them, "what this funnel must have
been like when it was filled with boiling lava, and the level
of that incandescent liquid rose right to the mountain's mouth,
like cast iron up the insides of a furnace?"
"I can picture it perfectly," Conseil replied. "But will master
tell me why this huge smelter suspended operations, and how it
is that an oven was replaced by the tranquil waters of a lake?"
"In all likelihood, Conseil, because some convulsion created an opening
below the surface of the ocean, the opening that serves as a passageway
for the Nautilus. Then the waters of the Atlantic rushed inside
the mountain. There ensued a dreadful struggle between the elements
of fire and water, a struggle ending in King Neptune's favor.
But many centuries have passed since then, and this submerged
volcano has changed into a peaceful cavern."
"That's fine," Ned Land answered. "I accept the explanation,
but in our personal interests, I'm sorry this opening the professor
mentions wasn't made above sea level."
"But Ned my friend," Conseil answered, "if it weren't an underwater
passageway, the Nautilus couldn't enter it!"
"And I might add, Mr. Land," I said, "that the waters wouldn't have
rushed under the mountain, and the volcano would still be a volcano.
So you have nothing to be sorry about."
Our climb continued. The gradients got steeper and narrower.
Sometimes they were cut across by deep pits that had to be cleared.
Masses of overhanging rock had to be gotten around. You slid on
your knees, you crept on your belly. But helped by the Canadian's
strength and Conseil's dexterity, we overcame every obstacle.
At an elevation of about thirty meters, the nature of the terrain
changed without becoming any easier. Pudding stones and trachyte
gave way to black basaltic rock: here, lying in slabs all swollen
with blisters; there, shaped like actual prisms and arranged into a
series of columns that supported the springings of this immense vault,
a wonderful sample of natural architecture. Then, among this
238
basaltic rock, there snaked long, hardened lava flows inlaid with veins
of bituminous coal and in places covered by wide carpets of sulfur.
The sunshine coming through the crater had grown stronger,
shedding a hazy light over all the volcanic waste forever buried
in the heart of this extinct mountain.
But when we had ascended to an elevation of about 250 feet,
we were stopped by insurmountable obstacles. The converging inside
walls changed into overhangs, and our climb into a circular stroll.
At this topmost level the vegetable kingdom began to challenge
the mineral kingdom. Shrubs, and even a few trees, emerged from crevices
in the walls. I recognized some spurges that let their caustic,
purgative sap trickle out. There were heliotropes, very remiss
at living up to their sun-worshipping reputations since no sunlight
ever reached them; their clusters of flowers drooped sadly,
their colors and scents were faded. Here and there chrysanthemums
sprouted timidly at the feet of aloes with long, sad, sickly leaves.
But between these lava flows I spotted little violets that still gave
off a subtle fragrance, and I confess that I inhaled it with delight.
The soul of a flower is its scent, and those splendid water plants,
flowers of the sea, have no souls!
We had arrived at the foot of a sturdy clump of dragon trees,
which were splitting the rocks with exertions of their muscular roots,
when Ned Land exclaimed:
"Oh, sir, a hive!"
"A hive?" I answered, with a gesture of utter disbelief.
"Yes, a hive," the Canadian repeated, "with bees buzzing around!"
I went closer and was forced to recognize the obvious. At the mouth
of a hole cut in the trunk of a dragon tree, there swarmed thousands
of these ingenious insects so common to all the Canary Islands,
where their output is especially prized.
Naturally enough, the Canadian wanted to lay in a supply of honey,
and it would have been ill-mannered of me to say no. He mixed sulfur
with some dry leaves, set them on fire with a spark from his tinderbox,
and proceeded to smoke the bees out. Little by little the buzzing died
down and the disemboweled hive yielded several pounds of sweet honey.
Ned Land stuffed his haversack with it.
"When I've mixed this honey with our breadfruit batter," he told us,
"I'll be ready to serve you a delectable piece of cake."
"But of course," Conseil put in, "it will be gingerbread!"
"I'm all for gingerbread," I said, "but let's resume
this fascinating stroll."
At certain turns in the trail we were going along, the lake
appeared in its full expanse. The ship's beacon lit up that whole
placid surface, which experienced neither ripples nor undulations.
The Nautilus lay perfectly still. On its platform and on the embankment,
crewmen were bustling around, black shadows that stood out clearly
in the midst of the luminous air.
Just then we went around the highest ridge of these rocky
239
foothills that supported the vault. Then I saw that bees weren't
the animal kingdom's only representatives inside this volcano.
Here and in the shadows, birds of prey soared and whirled,
flying away from nests perched on tips of rock. There were
sparrow hawks with white bellies, and screeching kestrels.
With all the speed their stiltlike legs could muster, fine fat bustards
scampered over the slopes. I'll let the reader decide whether
the Canadian's appetite was aroused by the sight of this tasty game,
and whether he regretted having no rifle in his hands. He tried
to make stones do the work of bullets, and after several fruitless
attempts, he managed to wound one of these magnificent bustards.
To say he risked his life twenty times in order to capture this
bird is simply the unadulterated truth; but he fared so well,
the animal went into his sack to join the honeycombs.
By then we were forced to go back down to the beach because the ridge
had become impossible. Above us, the yawning crater looked like
the wide mouth of a well. From where we stood, the sky was pretty easy
to see, and I watched clouds race by, disheveled by the west wind,
letting tatters of mist trail over the mountain's summit.
Proof positive that those clouds kept at a moderate altitude,
because this volcano didn't rise more than 1,800 feet above the level
of the ocean.
Half an hour after the Canadian's latest exploits, we were back
on the inner beach. There the local flora was represented by a wide
carpet of samphire, a small umbelliferous plant that keeps quite nicely,
which also boasts the names glasswort, saxifrage, and sea fennel.
Conseil picked a couple bunches. As for the local fauna,
it included thousands of crustaceans of every type:
lobsters, hermit crabs, prawns, mysid shrimps, daddy longlegs,
rock crabs, and a prodigious number of seashells, such as cowries,
murex snails, and limpets.
In this locality there gaped the mouth of a magnificent cave.
My companions and I took great pleasure in stretching out on its
fine-grained sand. Fire had polished the sparkling enamel of its
inner walls, sprinkled all over with mica-rich dust. Ned Land tapped
these walls and tried to probe their thickness. I couldn't help smiling.
Our conversation then turned to his everlasting escape plans,
and without going too far, I felt I could offer him this hope:
Captain Nemo had gone down south only to replenish his sodium supplies.
So I hoped he would now hug the coasts of Europe and America,
which would allow the Canadian to try again with a greater
chance of success.
We were stretched out in this delightful cave for an hour.
Our conversation, lively at the outset, then languished.
A definite drowsiness overcame us. Since I saw no good reason
to resist the call of sleep, I fell into a heavy doze.
I dreamed--one doesn't choose his dreams--that my life had been
reduced to the vegetating existence of a simple mollusk.
It seemed to me that this cave made up my double-valved shell. . . .
Suddenly Conseil's voice startled me awake.
"Get up! Get up!" shouted the fine lad.
"What is it?" I asked, in a sitting position.
240
"The water's coming up to us!"
I got back on my feet. Like a torrent the sea was rushing
into our retreat, and since we definitely were not mollusks,
we had to clear out.
In a few seconds we were safe on top of the cave.
"What happened?" Conseil asked. "Some new phenomenon?"
"Not quite, my friends!" I replied. "It was the tide,
merely the tide, which wellnigh caught us by surprise just as it
did Sir Walter Scott's hero! The ocean outside is rising,
and by a perfectly natural law of balance, the level of this
lake is also rising. We've gotten off with a mild dunking.
Let's go change clothes on the Nautilus."
Three-quarters of an hour later, we had completed our circular stroll
and were back on board. Just then the crewmen finished loading
the sodium supplies, and the Nautilus could have departed immediately.
But Captain Nemo gave no orders. Would he wait for nightfall
and exit through his underwater passageway in secrecy? Perhaps.
Be that as it may, by the next day the Nautilus had left its home
port and was navigating well out from any shore, a few meters
beneath the waves of the Atlantic.
241
CHAPTER 11
The Sargasso Sea
THE NAUTILUS didn't change direction. For the time being, then,
we had to set aside any hope of returning to European seas.
Captain Nemo kept his prow pointing south. Where was he taking us?
I was afraid to guess.
That day the Nautilus crossed an odd part of the Atlantic Ocean. No one
is unaware of the existence of that great warm-water current known
by name as the Gulf Stream. After emerging from channels off Florida,
it heads toward Spitzbergen. But before entering the Gulf of Mexico
near latitude 44 degrees north, this current divides into two arms;
its chief arm makes for the shores of Ireland and Norway
while the second flexes southward at the level of the Azores;
then it hits the coast of Africa, sweeps in a long oval, and returns
to the Caribbean Sea.
Now then, this second arm--more accurately, a collar--forms a ring
of warm water around a section of cool, tranquil, motionless ocean
called the Sargasso Sea. This is an actual lake in the open Atlantic,
and the great current's waters take at least three years to circle it.
Properly speaking, the Sargasso Sea covers every submerged part
of Atlantis. Certain authors have even held that the many weeds
strewn over this sea were torn loose from the prairies of that
ancient continent. But it's more likely that these grasses, algae,
and fucus plants were carried off from the beaches of Europe and America,
then taken as far as this zone by the Gulf Stream. This is one
of the reasons why Christopher Columbus assumed the existence
of a New World. When the ships of that bold investigator arrived
in the Sargasso Sea, they had great difficulty navigating in the midst
of these weeds, which, much to their crews' dismay, slowed them down
to a halt; and they wasted three long weeks crossing this sector.
Such was the region our Nautilus was visiting just then:
a genuine prairie, a tightly woven carpet of algae, gulfweed,
and bladder wrack so dense and compact a craft's stempost couldn't
tear through it without difficulty. Accordingly, not wanting
to entangle his propeller in this weed-choked mass, Captain Nemo
stayed at a depth some meters below the surface of the waves.
The name Sargasso comes from the Spanish word "sargazo,"
meaning gulfweed. This gulfweed, the swimming gulfweed or
berry carrier, is the chief substance making up this immense shoal.
And here's why these water plants collect in this placid Atlantic basin,
according to the expert on the subject, Commander Maury, author of
The Physical Geography of the Sea.
The explanation he gives seems to entail a set of conditions that
everybody knows: "Now," Maury says, "if bits of cork or chaff,
or any floating substance, be put into a basin, and a circular motion
be given to the water, all the light substances will be found crowding
together near the center of the pool, where there is the least motion.
Just such a basin is the Atlantic Ocean to the Gulf Stream,
and the Sargasso Sea is the center of the whirl."
I share Maury's view, and I was able to study the phenomenon in this
242
exclusive setting where ships rarely go. Above us, huddled among
the brown weeds, there floated objects originating from all over:
tree trunks ripped from the Rocky Mountains or the Andes and sent
floating down the Amazon or the Mississippi, numerous pieces
of wreckage, remnants of keels or undersides, bulwarks staved
in and so weighed down with seashells and barnacles, they couldn't
rise to the surface of the ocean. And the passing years will someday
bear out Maury's other view that by collecting in this way over
the centuries, these substances will be turned to stone by the action
of the waters and will then form inexhaustible coalfields.
Valuable reserves prepared by farseeing nature for that time when man
will have exhausted his mines on the continents.
In the midst of this hopelessly tangled fabric of weeds and fucus plants,
I noted some delightful pink-colored, star-shaped alcyon coral,
sea anemone trailing the long tresses of their tentacles,
some green, red, and blue jellyfish, and especially those big
rhizostome jellyfish that Cuvier described, whose bluish parasols
are trimmed with violet festoons.
We spent the whole day of February 22 in the Sargasso Sea, where fish
that dote on marine plants and crustaceans find plenty to eat.
The next day the ocean resumed its usual appearance.
From this moment on, for nineteen days from February 23 to March 12,
the Nautilus stayed in the middle of the Atlantic, hustling us
along at a constant speed of 100 leagues every twenty-four hours.
It was obvious that Captain Nemo wanted to carry out his underwater
program, and I had no doubt that he intended, after doubling Cape Horn,
to return to the Pacific South Seas.
So Ned Land had good reason to worry. In these wide seas empty
of islands, it was no longer feasible to jump ship. Nor did we
have any way to counter Captain Nemo's whims. We had no choice
but to acquiesce; but if we couldn't attain our end through force
or cunning, I liked to think we might achieve it through persuasion.
Once this voyage was over, might not Captain Nemo consent to set
us free in return for our promise never to reveal his existence?
Our word of honor, which we sincerely would have kept.
However, this delicate question would have to be negotiated with
the captain. But how would he receive our demands for freedom?
At the very outset and in no uncertain terms, hadn't he declared
that the secret of his life required that we be permanently imprisoned
on board the Nautilus? Wouldn't he see my four-month silence
as a tacit acceptance of this situation? Would my returning to this
subject arouse suspicions that could jeopardize our escape plans,
if we had promising circumstances for trying again later on?
I weighed all these considerations, turned them over in my mind,
submitted them to Conseil, but he was as baffled as I was.
In short, although I'm not easily discouraged, I realized that my
chances of ever seeing my fellow men again were shrinking by the day,
especially at a time when Captain Nemo was recklessly racing toward
the south Atlantic!
During those nineteen days just mentioned, no unique incidents
distinguished our voyage. I saw little of the captain.
He was at work. In the library I often found books he had left open,
especially books on natural history. He had thumbed through my work
on the great ocean depths, and the margins were covered with his notes,
which sometimes contradicted my theories and formulations.
243
But the captain remained content with this method of refining my work,
and he rarely discussed it with me. Sometimes I heard melancholy
sounds reverberating from the organ, which he played very expressively,
but only at night in the midst of the most secretive darkness,
while the Nautilus slumbered in the wilderness of the ocean.
During this part of our voyage, we navigated on the surface of the waves
for entire days. The sea was nearly deserted. A few sailing ships,
laden for the East Indies, were heading toward the Cape of
Good Hope. One day we were chased by the longboats of a whaling vessel,
which undoubtedly viewed us as some enormous baleen whale of great value.
But Captain Nemo didn't want these gallant gentlemen wasting their
time and energy, so he ended the hunt by diving beneath the waters.
This incident seemed to fascinate Ned Land intensely.
I'm sure the Canadian was sorry that these fishermen couldn't
harpoon our sheet-iron cetacean and mortally wound it.
During this period the fish Conseil and I observed differed little
from those we had already studied in other latitudes. Chief among
them were specimens of that dreadful cartilaginous genus that's
divided into three subgenera numbering at least thirty-two species:
striped sharks five meters long, the head squat and wider than
the body, the caudal fin curved, the back with seven big, black,
parallel lines running lengthwise; then perlon sharks, ash gray,
pierced with seven gill openings, furnished with a single dorsal
fin placed almost exactly in the middle of the body.
Some big dogfish also passed by, a voracious species of shark if there
ever was one. With some justice, fishermen's yarns aren't to be trusted,
but here's what a few of them relate. Inside the corpse of one
of these animals there were found a buffalo head and a whole calf;
in another, two tuna and a sailor in uniform; in yet another,
a soldier with his saber; in another, finally, a horse with its rider.
In candor, none of these sounds like divinely inspired truth.
But the fact remains that not a single dogfish let itself get caught
in the Nautilus's nets, so I can't vouch for their voracity.
Schools of elegant, playful dolphin swam alongside for entire days.
They went in groups of five or six, hunting in packs like wolves
over the countryside; moreover, they're just as voracious as dogfish,
if I can believe a certain Copenhagen professor who says that from one
dolphin's stomach, he removed thirteen porpoises and fifteen seals.
True, it was a killer whale, belonging to the biggest known species,
whose length sometimes exceeds twenty-four feet. The family
Delphinia numbers ten genera, and the dolphins I saw were akin
to the genus Delphinorhynchus, remarkable for an extremely narrow
muzzle four times as long as the cranium. Measuring three meters,
their bodies were black on top, underneath a pinkish white strewn
with small, very scattered spots.
From these seas I'll also mention some unusual specimens of croakers,
fish from the order Acanthopterygia, family Scienidea. Some authors--
more artistic than scientific--claim that these fish are
melodious singers, that their voices in unison put on concerts
unmatched by human choristers. I don't say nay, but to my regret
these croakers didn't serenade us as we passed.
Finally, to conclude, Conseil classified a large number
of flying fish. Nothing could have made a more unusual sight
than the marvelous timing with which dolphins hunt these fish.
244
Whatever the range of its flight, however evasive its trajectory
(even up and over the Nautilus), the hapless flying fish always found
a dolphin to welcome it with open mouth. These were either flying
gurnards or kitelike sea robins, whose lips glowed in the dark,
at night scrawling fiery streaks in the air before plunging into
the murky waters like so many shooting stars.
Our navigating continued under these conditions until March 13.
That day the Nautilus was put to work in some depth-sounding
experiments that fascinated me deeply.
By then we had fared nearly 13,000 leagues from our starting point
in the Pacific high seas. Our position fix placed us in latitude
45 degrees 37' south and longitude 37 degrees 53' west. These were
the same waterways where Captain Denham, aboard the Herald,
payed out 14,000 meters of sounding line without finding bottom.
It was here too that Lieutenant Parker, aboard the American
frigate Congress, was unable to reach the underwater soil
at 15,149 meters.
Captain Nemo decided to take his Nautilus down to the lowest
depths in order to double-check these different soundings.
I got ready to record the results of this experiment.
The panels in the lounge opened, and maneuvers began for reaching
those strata so prodigiously far removed.
It was apparently considered out of the question to dive by filling
the ballast tanks. Perhaps they wouldn't sufficiently increase
the Nautilus's specific gravity. Moreover, in order to come back up,
it would be necessary to expel the excess water, and our pumps
might not have been strong enough to overcome the outside pressure.
Captain Nemo decided to make for the ocean floor by submerging on
an appropriately gradual diagonal with the help of his side fins,
which were set at a 45 degrees angle to the Nautilus's waterline.
Then the propeller was brought to its maximum speed, and its four
blades churned the waves with indescribable violence.
Under this powerful thrust the Nautilus's hull quivered like a
resonating chord, and the ship sank steadily under the waters.
Stationed in the lounge, the captain and I watched the needle
swerving swiftly over the pressure gauge. Soon we had gone below
the livable zone where most fish reside. Some of these animals
can thrive only at the surface of seas or rivers, but a minority
can dwell at fairly great depths. Among the latter I observed
a species of dogfish called the cow shark that's equipped with six
respiratory slits, the telescope fish with its enormous eyes,
the armored gurnard with gray thoracic fins plus black pectoral
fins and a breastplate protected by pale red slabs of bone,
then finally the grenadier, living at a depth of 1,200 meters,
by that point tolerating a pressure of 120 atmospheres.
I asked Captain Nemo if he had observed any fish at
more considerable depths.
"Fish? Rarely!" he answered me. "But given the current state
of marine science, who are we to presume, what do we really know
of these depths?"
"Just this, captain. In going toward the ocean's lower strata,
245
we know that vegetable life disappears more quickly than animal life.
We know that moving creatures can still be encountered where water
plants no longer grow. We know that oysters and pilgrim scallops live
in 2,000 meters of water, and that Admiral McClintock, England's hero of
the polar seas, pulled in a live sea star from a depth of 2,500 meters.
We know that the crew of the Royal Navy's Bulldog fished up a starfish
from 2,620 fathoms, hence from a depth of more than one vertical league.
Would you still say, Captain Nemo, that we really know nothing?"
"No, professor," the captain replied, "I wouldn't be so discourteous.
Yet I'll ask you to explain how these creatures can live at such depths?"
"I explain it on two grounds," I replied. "In the first place,
because vertical currents, which are caused by differences in the
water's salinity and density, can produce enough motion to sustain
the rudimentary lifestyles of sea lilies and starfish."
"True," the captain put in.
"In the second place, because oxygen is the basis of life, and we
know that the amount of oxygen dissolved in salt water increases
rather than decreases with depth, that the pressure in these lower
strata helps to concentrate their oxygen content."
"Oho! We know that, do we?" Captain Nemo replied in a tone
of mild surprise. "Well, professor, we have good reason to know
it because it's the truth. I might add, in fact, that the air
bladders of fish contain more nitrogen than oxygen when these animals
are caught at the surface of the water, and conversely, more oxygen
than nitrogen when they're pulled up from the lower depths.
Which bears out your formulation. But let's continue our observations."
My eyes flew back to the pressure gauge. The instrument indicated
a depth of 6,000 meters. Our submergence had been going on for an hour.
The Nautilus slid downward on its slanting fins, still sinking.
These deserted waters were wonderfully clear, with a transparency
impossible to convey. An hour later we were at 13,000 meters--
about three and a quarter vertical leagues--and the ocean floor
was nowhere in sight.
However, at 14,000 meters I saw blackish peaks rising in the midst
of the waters. But these summits could have belonged to mountains
as high or even higher than the Himalayas or Mt. Blanc, and the extent
of these depths remained incalculable.
Despite the powerful pressures it was undergoing, the Nautilus sank
still deeper. I could feel its sheet-iron plates trembling down to
their riveted joins; metal bars arched; bulkheads groaned; the lounge
windows seemed to be warping inward under the water's pressure.
And this whole sturdy mechanism would surely have given way, if, as its
captain had said, it weren't capable of resisting like a solid block.
While grazing these rocky slopes lost under the waters, I still
spotted some seashells, tube worms, lively annelid worms from
the genus Spirorbis, and certain starfish specimens.
But soon these last representatives of animal life vanished,
and three vertical leagues down, the Nautilus passed below the limits
of underwater existence just as an air balloon rises above the
breathable zones in the sky. We reached a depth of 16,000 meters--
246
four vertical leagues--and by then the Nautilus's plating was
tolerating a pressure of 1,600 atmospheres, in other words,
1,600 kilograms per each square centimeter on its surface!
"What an experience!" I exclaimed. "Traveling these deep
regions where no man has ever ventured before! Look, captain!
Look at these magnificent rocks, these uninhabited caves,
these last global haunts where life is no longer possible!
What unheard-of scenery, and why are we reduced to preserving it
only as a memory?"
"Would you like," Captain Nemo asked me, "to bring back more than
just a memory?"
"What do you mean?"
"I mean that nothing could be easier than taking a photograph
of this underwater region!"
Before I had time to express the surprise this new proposition caused me,
a camera was carried into the lounge at Captain Nemo's request.
The liquid setting, electrically lit, unfolded with perfect
clarity through the wide-open panels. No shadows, no blurs,
thanks to our artificial light. Not even sunshine could have
been better for our purposes. With the thrust of its propeller
curbed by the slant of its fins, the Nautilus stood still.
The camera was aimed at the scenery on the ocean floor, and in a few
seconds we had a perfect negative.
I attach a print of the positive. In it you can view these primordial
rocks that have never seen the light of day, this nether granite
that forms the powerful foundation of our globe, the deep caves
cut into the stony mass, the outlines of incomparable distinctness
whose far edges stand out in black as if from the brush of certain
Flemish painters. In the distance is a mountainous horizon, a wondrously
undulating line that makes up the background of this landscape.
The general effect of these smooth rocks is indescribable:
black, polished, without moss or other blemish, carved into
strange shapes, sitting firmly on a carpet of sand that sparkled
beneath our streams of electric light.
Meanwhile, his photographic operations over, Captain Nemo told me:
"Let's go back up, professor. We mustn't push our luck and expose
the Nautilus too long to these pressures."
"Let's go back up!" I replied.
"Hold on tight."
Before I had time to realize why the captain made this recommendation,
I was hurled to the carpet.
Its fins set vertically, its propeller thrown in gear at
the captain's signal, the Nautilus rose with lightning speed,
shooting upward like an air balloon into the sky. Vibrating resonantly,
it knifed through the watery mass. Not a single detail was visible.
In four minutes it had cleared the four vertical leagues separating it
from the surface of the ocean, and after emerging like a flying fish,
it fell back into the sea, making the waves leap to prodigious heights.
247
CHAPTER 12
Sperm Whales and Baleen Whales
DURING THE NIGHT of March 13-14, the Nautilus resumed its
southward heading. Once it was abreast of Cape Horn, I thought it
would strike west of the cape, make for Pacific seas, and complete
its tour of the world. It did nothing of the sort and kept moving
toward the southernmost regions. So where was it bound? The pole?
That was insanity. I was beginning to think that the captain's
recklessness more than justified Ned Land's worst fears.
For a good while the Canadian had said nothing more to me about
his escape plans. He had become less sociable, almost sullen.
I could see how heavily this protracted imprisonment was weighing on him.
I could feel the anger building in him. Whenever he encountered
the captain, his eyes would flicker with dark fire, and I was
in constant dread that his natural vehemence would cause him
to do something rash.
That day, March 14, he and Conseil managed to find me in my stateroom.
I asked them the purpose of their visit.
"To put a simple question to you, sir," the Canadian answered me.
"Go on, Ned."
"How many men do you think are on board the Nautilus?"
"I'm unable to say, my friend."
"It seems to me," Ned Land went on, "that it wouldn't take much
of a crew to run a ship like this one."
"Correct," I replied. "Under existing conditions some ten men
at the most should be enough to operate it."
"All right," the Canadian said, "then why should there be any
more than that?"
"Why?" I answered.
I stared at Ned Land, whose motives were easy to guess.
"Because," I said, "if I can trust my hunches, if I truly understand
the captain's way of life, his Nautilus isn't simply a ship.
It's meant to be a refuge for people like its commander, people who
have severed all ties with the shore."
"Perhaps," Conseil said, "but in a nutshell, the Nautilus can hold only
a certain number of men, so couldn't master estimate their maximum?"
"How, Conseil?"
"By calculating it. Master is familiar with the ship's capacity,
hence the amount of air it contains; on the other hand,
master knows how much air each man consumes in the act of breathing,
and he can compare this data with the fact that the Nautilus must
rise to the surface every twenty-four hours . . ."
248
Conseil didn't finish his sentence, but I could easily see what
he was driving at.
"I follow you," I said. "But while they're simple to do,
such calculations can give only a very uncertain figure."
"No problem," the Canadian went on insistently.
"Then here's how to calculate it," I replied. "In one hour
each man consumes the oxygen contained in 100 liters of air,
hence during twenty-four hours the oxygen contained in 2,400 liters.
Therefore, we must look for the multiple of 2,400 liters of air
that gives us the amount found in the Nautilus."
"Precisely," Conseil said.
"Now then," I went on, "the Nautilus's capacity is 1,500 metric tons,
and that of a ton is 1,000 liters, so the Nautilus holds 1,500,000
liters of air, which, divided by 2,400 . . ."
I did a quick pencil calculation.
". . . gives us the quotient of 625. Which is tantamount to saying
that the air contained in the Nautilus would be exactly enough
for 625 men over twenty-four hours."
"625!" Ned repeated.
"But rest assured," I added, "that between passengers, seamen,
or officers, we don't total one-tenth of that figure."
"Which is still too many for three men!" Conseil muttered.
"So, my poor Ned, I can only counsel patience."
"And," Conseil replied, "even more than patience, resignation."
Conseil had said the true word.
"Even so," he went on, "Captain Nemo can't go south forever!
He'll surely have to stop, if only at the Ice Bank, and he'll
return to the seas of civilization! Then it will be time to resume
Ned Land's plans."
The Canadian shook his head, passed his hand over his brow,
made no reply, and left us.
"With master's permission, I'll make an observation to him,"
Conseil then told me. "Our poor Ned broods about all
the things he can't have. He's haunted by his former life.
He seems to miss everything that's denied us. He's obsessed by his
old memories and it's breaking his heart. We must understand him.
What does he have to occupy him here? Nothing. He isn't a scientist
like master, and he doesn't share our enthusiasm for the sea's wonders.
He would risk anything just to enter a tavern in his own country!"
To be sure, the monotony of life on board must have seemed unbearable
to the Canadian, who was accustomed to freedom and activity.
It was a rare event that could excite him. That day, however,
249
a development occurred that reminded him of his happy years
as a harpooner.
Near eleven o'clock in the morning, while on the surface of
the ocean, the Nautilus fell in with a herd of baleen whales.
This encounter didn't surprise me, because I knew these animals
were being hunted so relentlessly that they took refuge in the ocean
basins of the high latitudes.
In the maritime world and in the realm of geographic exploration,
whales have played a major role. This is the animal that first
dragged the Basques in its wake, then Asturian Spaniards, Englishmen,
and Dutchmen, emboldening them against the ocean's perils,
and leading them to the ends of the earth. Baleen whales like
to frequent the southernmost and northernmost seas. Old legends
even claim that these cetaceans led fishermen to within a mere
seven leagues of the North Pole. Although this feat is fictitious,
it will someday come true, because it's likely that by hunting
whales in the Arctic or Antarctic regions, man will finally reach
this unknown spot on the globe.
We were seated on the platform next to a tranquil sea. The month
of March, since it's the equivalent of October in these latitudes,
was giving us some fine autumn days. It was the Canadian--
on this topic he was never mistaken--who sighted a baleen whale
on the eastern horizon. If you looked carefully, you could see
its blackish back alternately rise and fall above the waves,
five miles from the Nautilus.
"Wow!" Ned Land exclaimed. "If I were on board a whaler,
there's an encounter that would be great fun! That's one big animal!
Look how high its blowholes are spouting all that air and steam!
Damnation! Why am I chained to this hunk of sheet iron!"
"Why, Ned!" I replied. "You still aren't over your old fishing urges?"
"How could a whale fisherman forget his old trade, sir? Who could
ever get tired of such exciting hunting?"
"You've never fished these seas, Ned?"
"Never, sir. Just the northernmost seas, equally in the Bering Strait
and the Davis Strait."
"So the southern right whale is still unknown to you.
Until now it's the bowhead whale you've hunted, and it won't risk
going past the warm waters of the equator."
"Oh, professor, what are you feeding me?" the Canadian answered
in a tolerably skeptical tone.
"I'm feeding you the facts."
"By thunder! In '65, just two and a half years ago, I to whom you speak,
I myself stepped onto the carcass of a whale near Greenland,
and its flank still carried the marked harpoon of a whaling ship
from the Bering Sea. Now I ask you, after it had been wounded
west of America, how could this animal be killed in the east,
unless it had cleared the equator and doubled Cape Horn or the Cape
of Good Hope?"
250
"I agree with our friend Ned," Conseil said, "and I'm waiting
to hear how master will reply to him."
"Master will reply, my friends, that baleen whales are localized,
according to species, within certain seas that they never leave.
And if one of these animals went from the Bering Strait
to the Davis Strait, it's quite simply because there's some
passageway from the one sea to the other, either along the coasts
of Canada or Siberia."
"You expect us to fall for that?" the Canadian asked, tipping me a wink.
"If master says so," Conseil replied.
"Which means," the Canadian went on, "since I've never fished
these waterways, I don't know the whales that frequent them?"
"That's what I've been telling you, Ned."
"All the more reason to get to know them," Conseil answered.
"Look! Look!" the Canadian exclaimed, his voice full of excitement.
"It's approaching! It's coming toward us! It's thumbing its nose at me!
It knows I can't do a blessed thing to it!"
Ned stamped his foot. Brandishing an imaginary harpoon,
his hands positively trembled.
"These cetaceans," he asked, "are they as big as the ones in
the northernmost seas?"
"Pretty nearly, Ned."
"Because I've seen big baleen whales, sir, whales measuring up
to 100 feet long! I've even heard that those rorqual whales off
the Aleutian Islands sometimes get over 150 feet."
"That strikes me as exaggerated," I replied. "Those animals are
only members of the genus Balaenoptera furnished with dorsal fins,
and like sperm whales, they're generally smaller than the bowhead whale."
"Oh!" exclaimed the Canadian, whose eyes hadn't left the ocean.
"It's getting closer, it's coming into the Nautilus's waters!"
Then, going on with his conversation:
"You talk about sperm whales," he said, "as if they were
little beasts! But there are stories of gigantic sperm whales.
They're shrewd cetaceans. I hear that some will cover themselves
with algae and fucus plants. People mistake them for islets.
They pitch camp on top, make themselves at home, light a fire--"
"Build houses," Conseil said.
"Yes, funny man," Ned Land replied. "Then one fine day the animal
dives and drags all its occupants down into the depths."
"Like in the voyages of Sinbad the Sailor," I answered, laughing.
"Oh, Mr. Land, you're addicted to tall tales! What sperm whales
251
you're handing us! I hope you don't really believe in them!"
"Mr. Naturalist," the Canadian replied in all seriousness, "when it
comes to whales, you can believe anything! (Look at that one move!
Look at it stealing away!) People claim these animals can circle
around the world in just fifteen days."
"I don't say nay."
"But what you undoubtedly don't know, Professor Aronnax, is that at
the beginning of the world, whales traveled even quicker."
"Oh really, Ned! And why so?"
"Because in those days their tails moved side to side,
like those on fish, in other words, their tails were straight up,
thrashing the water from left to right, right to left.
But spotting that they swam too fast, our Creator twisted their tails,
and ever since they've been thrashing the waves up and down,
at the expense of their speed."
"Fine, Ned," I said, then resurrected one of the Canadian's expressions.
"You expect us to fall for that?"
"Not too terribly," Ned Land replied, "and no more than if I told you
there are whales that are 300 feet long and weigh 1,000,000 pounds."
"That's indeed considerable," I said. "But you must admit that
certain cetaceans do grow to significant size, since they're said
to supply as much as 120 metric tons of oil."
"That I've seen," the Canadian said.
"I can easily believe it, Ned, just as I can believe that certain
baleen whales equal 100 elephants in bulk. Imagine the impact
of such a mass if it were launched at full speed!"
"Is it true," Conseil asked, "that they can sink ships?"
"Ships? I doubt it," I replied. "However, they say that in 1820,
right in these southern seas, a baleen whale rushed at the Essex
and pushed it backward at a speed of four meters per second.
Its stern was flooded, and the Essex went down fast."
Ned looked at me with a bantering expression.
"Speaking for myself," he said, "I once got walloped by a whale's tail--
in my longboat, needless to say. My companions and I were launched
to an altitude of six meters. But next to the professor's whale,
mine was just a baby."
"Do these animals live a long time?" Conseil asked.
"A thousand years," the Canadian replied without hesitation.
"And how, Ned," I asked, "do you know that's so?"
"Because people say so."
"And why do people say so?"
252
"Because people know so."
"No, Ned! People don't know so, they suppose so, and here's the logic
with which they back up their beliefs. When fishermen first hunted whales
400 years ago, these animals grew to bigger sizes than they do today.
Reasonably enough, it's assumed that today's whales are smaller
because they haven't had time to reach their full growth.
That's why the Count de Buffon's encyclopedia says that cetaceans
can live, and even must live, for a thousand years. You understand?"
Ned Land didn't understand. He no longer even heard me.
That baleen whale kept coming closer. His eyes devoured it.
"Oh!" he exclaimed. "It's not just one whale, it's ten, twenty,
a whole gam! And I can't do a thing! I'm tied hand and foot!"
"But Ned my friend," Conseil said, "why not ask Captain Nemo
for permission to hunt--"
Before Conseil could finish his sentence, Ned Land scooted down
the hatch and ran to look for the captain. A few moments later,
the two of them reappeared on the platform.
Captain Nemo observed the herd of cetaceans cavorting on the waters
a mile from the Nautilus.
"They're southern right whales," he said. "There goes the fortune
of a whole whaling fleet."
"Well, sir," the Canadian asked, "couldn't I hunt them, just so I
don't forget my old harpooning trade?"
"Hunt them? What for?" Captain Nemo replied. "Simply to destroy them?
We have no use for whale oil on this ship."
"But, sir," the Canadian went on, "in the Red Sea you authorized
us to chase a dugong!"
"There it was an issue of obtaining fresh meat for my crew.
Here it would be killing for the sake of killing. I'm well aware
that's a privilege reserved for mankind, but I don't allow such
murderous pastimes. When your peers, Mr. Land, destroy decent,
harmless creatures like the southern right whale or the bowhead whale,
they commit a reprehensible offense. Thus they've already depopulated
all of Baffin Bay, and they'll wipe out a whole class of useful animals.
So leave these poor cetaceans alone. They have quite enough
natural enemies, such as sperm whales, swordfish, and sawfish,
without you meddling with them."
I'll let the reader decide what faces the Canadian made during this
lecture on hunting ethics. Furnishing such arguments to a professional
harpooner was a waste of words. Ned Land stared at Captain Nemo
and obviously missed his meaning. But the captain was right.
Thanks to the mindless, barbaric bloodthirstiness of fishermen,
the last baleen whale will someday disappear from the ocean.
Ned Land whistled "Yankee Doodle" between his teeth, stuffed his
hands in his pockets, and turned his back on us.
253
Meanwhile Captain Nemo studied the herd of cetaceans, then addressed me:
"I was right to claim that baleen whales have enough natural enemies
without counting man. These specimens will soon have to deal
with mighty opponents. Eight miles to leeward, Professor Aronnax,
can you see those blackish specks moving about?"
"Yes, captain," I replied.
"Those are sperm whales, dreadful animals that I've sometimes
encountered in herds of 200 or 300! As for them, they're cruel,
destructive beasts, and they deserve to be exterminated."
The Canadian turned swiftly at these last words.
"Well, captain," I said, "on behalf of the baleen whales,
there's still time--"
"It's pointless to run any risks, professor. The Nautilus will
suffice to disperse these sperm whales. It's armed with a steel
spur quite equal to Mr. Land's harpoon, I imagine."
The Canadian didn't even bother shrugging his shoulders.
Attacking cetaceans with thrusts from a spur! Who ever heard
of such malarkey!
"Wait and see, Professor Aronnax," Captain Nemo said.
"We'll show you a style of hunting with which you aren't yet familiar.
We'll take no pity on these ferocious cetaceans. They're merely
mouth and teeth!"
Mouth and teeth! There's no better way to describe the long-skulled
sperm whale, whose length sometimes exceeds twenty-five meters.
The enormous head of this cetacean occupies about a third of its body.
Better armed than a baleen whale, whose upper jaw is adorned solely
with whalebone, the sperm whale is equipped with twenty-five
huge teeth that are twenty centimeters high, have cylindrical,
conical summits, and weigh two pounds each. In the top part of this
enormous head, inside big cavities separated by cartilage, you'll find
300 to 400 kilograms of that valuable oil called "spermaceti."
The sperm whale is an awkward animal, more tadpole than fish,
as Professor Frédol has noted. It's poorly constructed,
being "defective," so to speak, over the whole left side of its frame,
with good eyesight only in its right eye.
Meanwhile that monstrous herd kept coming closer.
It had seen the baleen whales and was preparing to attack.
You could tell in advance that the sperm whales would be victorious,
not only because they were better built for fighting than their
harmless adversaries, but also because they could stay longer
underwater before returning to breathe at the surface.
There was just time to run to the rescue of the baleen whales.
The Nautilus proceeded to midwater. Conseil, Ned, and I sat in front
of the lounge windows. Captain Nemo made his way to the helmsman's
side to operate his submersible as an engine of destruction.
Soon I felt the beats of our propeller getting faster, and we
picked up speed.
The battle between sperm whales and baleen whales had already begun
254
when the Nautilus arrived. It maneuvered to cut into the herd
of long-skulled predators. At first the latter showed little
concern at the sight of this new monster meddling in the battle.
But they soon had to sidestep its thrusts.
What a struggle! Ned Land quickly grew enthusiastic and even ended
up applauding. Brandished in its captain's hands, the Nautilus was
simply a fearsome harpoon. He hurled it at those fleshy masses and ran
them clean through, leaving behind two squirming animal halves.
As for those daunting strokes of the tail hitting our sides,
the ship never felt them. No more than the collisions it caused.
One sperm whale exterminated, it ran at another, tacked on the spot
so as not to miss its prey, went ahead or astern, obeyed its rudder,
dived when the cetacean sank to deeper strata, rose with it
when it returned to the surface, struck it head-on or slantwise,
hacked at it or tore it, and from every direction and at any speed,
skewered it with its dreadful spur.
What bloodshed! What a hubbub on the surface of the waves!
What sharp hisses and snorts unique to these frightened animals!
Their tails churned the normally peaceful strata into actual billows.
This Homeric slaughter dragged on for an hour, and the long-skulled
predators couldn't get away. Several times ten or twelve of them
teamed up, trying to crush the Nautilus with their sheer mass.
Through the windows you could see their enormous mouths paved
with teeth, their fearsome eyes. Losing all self-control, Ned Land
hurled threats and insults at them. You could feel them clinging
to the submersible like hounds atop a wild boar in the underbrush.
But by forcing the pace of its propeller, the Nautilus carried them off,
dragged them under, or brought them back to the upper level of the waters,
untroubled by their enormous weight or their powerful grip.
Finally this mass of sperm whales thinned out. The waves grew
tranquil again. I felt us rising to the surface of the ocean.
The hatch opened and we rushed onto the platform.
The sea was covered with mutilated corpses. A fearsome explosion
couldn't have slashed, torn, or shredded these fleshy masses with
greater violence. We were floating in the midst of gigantic bodies,
bluish on the back, whitish on the belly, and all deformed
by enormous protuberances. A few frightened sperm whales were
fleeing toward the horizon. The waves were dyed red over an area
of several miles, and the Nautilus was floating in the middle
of a sea of blood.
Captain Nemo rejoined us.
"Well, Mr. Land?" he said.
"Well, sir," replied the Canadian, whose enthusiasm had subsided,
"it's a dreadful sight for sure. But I'm a hunter not a butcher,
and this is plain butchery."
"It was a slaughter of destructive animals," the captain replied,
"and the Nautilus is no butcher knife."
"I prefer my harpoon," the Canadian answered.
"To each his own," the captain replied, staring intently at Ned Land.
255
I was in dread the latter would give way to some violent outburst
that might have had deplorable consequences. But his anger was
diverted by the sight of a baleen whale that the Nautilus had pulled
alongside of just then.
This animal had been unable to escape the teeth of those sperm whales.
I recognized the southern right whale, its head squat, its body dark
all over. Anatomically, it's distinguished from the white whale and
the black right whale by the fusion of its seven cervical vertebrae,
and it numbers two more ribs than its relatives. Floating on its side,
its belly riddled with bites, the poor cetacean was dead.
Still hanging from the tip of its mutilated fin was a little baby
whale that it had been unable to rescue from the slaughter.
Its open mouth let water flow through its whalebone like a murmuring surf.
Captain Nemo guided the Nautilus next to the animal's corpse.
Two of his men climbed onto the whale's flank, and to my astonishment,
I saw them draw from its udders all the milk they held, in other words,
enough to fill two or three casks.
The captain offered me a cup of this still-warm milk.
I couldn't help showing my distaste for such a beverage.
He assured me that this milk was excellent, no different from cow's milk.
I sampled it and agreed. So this milk was a worthwhile reserve
ration for us, because in the form of salt butter or cheese,
it would provide a pleasant change of pace from our standard fare.
From that day on, I noted with some uneasiness that Ned Land's
attitudes toward Captain Nemo grew worse and worse, and I decided
to keep a close watch on the Canadian's movements and activities.
256
CHAPTER 13
The Ice Bank
THE NAUTILUS resumed its unruffled southbound heading.
It went along the 50th meridian with considerable speed.
Would it go to the pole? I didn't think so, because every previous
attempt to reach this spot on the globe had failed. Besides, the season
was already quite advanced, since March 13 on Antarctic shores
corresponds with September 13 in the northernmost regions,
which marks the beginning of the equinoctial period.
On March 14 at latitude 55 degrees, I spotted floating ice,
plain pale bits of rubble twenty to twenty-five feet long,
which formed reefs over which the sea burst into foam. The Nautilus
stayed on the surface of the ocean. Having fished in the Arctic seas,
Ned Land was already familiar with the sight of icebergs.
Conseil and I were marveling at them for the first time.
In the sky toward the southern horizon, there stretched a dazzling
white band. English whalers have given this the name "ice blink."
No matter how heavy the clouds may be, they can't obscure
this phenomenon. It announces the presence of a pack, or shoal, of ice.
Indeed, larger blocks of ice soon appeared, their brilliance varying
at the whim of the mists. Some of these masses displayed green veins,
as if scrawled with undulating lines of copper sulfate. Others looked
like enormous amethysts, letting the light penetrate their insides.
The latter reflected the sun's rays from the thousand facets of
their crystals. The former, tinted with a bright limestone sheen,
would have supplied enough building material to make a whole marble town.
The farther down south we went, the more these floating islands grew
in numbers and prominence. Polar birds nested on them by the thousands.
These were petrels, cape pigeons, or puffins, and their calls
were deafening. Mistaking the Nautilus for the corpse of a whale,
some of them alighted on it and prodded its resonant sheet iron
with pecks of their beaks.
During this navigating in the midst of the ice, Captain Nemo
often stayed on the platform. He observed these deserted
waterways carefully. I saw his calm eyes sometimes perk up.
In these polar seas forbidden to man, did he feel right at home,
the lord of these unreachable regions? Perhaps. But he didn't say.
He stood still, reviving only when his pilot's instincts took over.
Then, steering his Nautilus with consummate dexterity, he skillfully
dodged the masses of ice, some of which measured several miles
in length, their heights varying from seventy to eighty meters.
Often the horizon seemed completely closed off. Abreast of latitude
60 degrees, every passageway had disappeared. Searching with care,
Captain Nemo soon found a narrow opening into which he brazenly slipped,
well aware, however, that it would close behind him.
Guided by his skillful hands, the Nautilus passed by all these different
masses of ice, which are classified by size and shape with a precision
that enraptured Conseil: "icebergs," or mountains; "ice fields,"
or smooth, limitless tracts; "drift ice," or floating floes;
"packs," or broken tracts, called "patches" when they're circular
and "streams" when they form long strips.
257
The temperature was fairly low. Exposed to the outside air,
the thermometer marked -2 degrees to
-3 degrees centigrade. But we were warmly dressed in furs,
for which seals and aquatic bears had paid the price. Evenly heated
by all its electric equipment, the Nautilus's interior defied
the most intense cold. Moreover, to find a bearable temperature,
the ship had only to sink just a few meters beneath the waves.
Two months earlier we would have enjoyed perpetual daylight in
this latitude; but night already fell for three or four hours, and later
it would cast six months of shadow over these circumpolar regions.
On March 15 we passed beyond the latitude of the South Shetland and
South Orkney Islands. The captain told me that many tribes of seals
used to inhabit these shores; but English and American whalers,
in a frenzy of destruction, slaughtered all the adults,
including pregnant females, and where life and activity once existed,
those fishermen left behind only silence and death.
Going along the 55th meridian, the Nautilus cut the Antarctic Circle
on March 16 near eight o'clock in the morning. Ice completely
surrounded us and closed off the horizon. Nevertheless, Captain Nemo
went from passageway to passageway, always proceeding south.
"But where's he going?" I asked.
"Straight ahead," Conseil replied. "Ultimately, when he can't go
any farther, he'll stop."
"I wouldn't bet on it!" I replied.
And in all honesty, I confess that this venturesome excursion
was far from displeasing to me. I can't express the intensity
of my amazement at the beauties of these new regions.
The ice struck superb poses. Here, its general effect suggested
an oriental town with countless minarets and mosques. There, a city
in ruins, flung to the ground by convulsions in the earth.
These views were varied continuously by the sun's oblique rays,
or were completely swallowed up by gray mists in the middle of blizzards.
Then explosions, cave-ins, and great iceberg somersaults would occur
all around us, altering the scenery like the changing landscape
in a diorama.
If the Nautilus was submerged during these losses of balance, we heard
the resulting noises spread under the waters with frightful intensity,
and the collapse of these masses created daunting eddies down
to the ocean's lower strata. The Nautilus then rolled and pitched
like a ship left to the fury of the elements.
Often, no longer seeing any way out, I thought we were imprisoned
for good, but Captain Nemo, guided by his instincts, discovered new
passageways from the tiniest indications. He was never wrong
when he observed slender threads of bluish water streaking through
these ice fields. Accordingly, I was sure that he had already
risked his Nautilus in the midst of the Antarctic seas.
However, during the day of March 16, these tracts of ice completely
barred our path. It wasn't the Ice Bank as yet, just huge ice
258
fields cemented together by the cold. This obstacle couldn't stop
Captain Nemo, and he launched his ship against the ice fields
with hideous violence. The Nautilus went into these brittle
masses like a wedge, splitting them with dreadful cracklings.
It was an old-fashioned battering ram propelled with infinite power.
Hurled aloft, ice rubble fell back around us like hail.
Through brute force alone, the submersible carved out a channel
for itself. Carried away by its momentum, the ship sometimes mounted
on top of these tracts of ice and crushed them with its weight,
or at other times, when cooped up beneath the ice fields, it split
them with simple pitching movements, creating wide punctures.
Violent squalls assaulted us during the daytime. Thanks to certain
heavy mists, we couldn't see from one end of the platform to the other.
The wind shifted abruptly to every point on the compass.
The snow was piling up in such packed layers, it had to be chipped
loose with blows from picks. Even in a temperature of merely -5
degrees centigrade, every outside part of the Nautilus was covered
with ice. A ship's rigging would have been unusable, because all
its tackle would have jammed in the grooves of the pulleys.
Only a craft without sails, driven by an electric motor that needed
no coal, could face such high latitudes.
Under these conditions the barometer generally stayed quite low.
It fell as far as 73.5 centimeters. Our compass indications
no longer offered any guarantees. The deranged needles would
mark contradictory directions as we approached the southern
magnetic pole, which doesn't coincide with the South Pole proper.
In fact, according to the astronomer Hansteen, this magnetic pole is
located fairly close to latitude 70 degrees and longitude 130 degrees,
or abiding by the observations of Louis-Isidore Duperrey, in longitude
135 degrees and latitude 70 degrees 30'. Hence we had to transport
compasses to different parts of the ship, take many readings,
and strike an average. Often we could chart our course only by guesswork,
a less than satisfactory method in the midst of these winding
passageways whose landmarks change continuously.
At last on March 18, after twenty futile assaults, the Nautilus
was decisively held in check. No longer was it an ice stream,
patch, or field--it was an endless, immovable barrier formed by ice
mountains fused to each other.
"The Ice Bank!" the Canadian told me.
For Ned Land, as well as for every navigator before us, I knew
that this was the great insurmountable obstacle. When the sun
appeared for an instant near noon, Captain Nemo took a reasonably
accurate sight that gave our position as longitude 51 degrees 30'
and latitude 67 degrees 39' south. This was a position already
well along in these Antarctic regions.
As for the liquid surface of the sea, there was no longer
any semblance of it before our eyes. Before the Nautilus's
spur there lay vast broken plains, a tangle of confused chunks
with all the helter-skelter unpredictability typical of a river's
surface a short while before its ice breakup; but in this case
the proportions were gigantic. Here and there stood sharp peaks,
lean spires that rose as high as 200 feet; farther off, a succession
of steeply cut cliffs sporting a grayish tint, huge mirrors
that reflected the sparse rays of a sun half drowned in mist.
259
Beyond, a stark silence reigned in this desolate natural setting,
a silence barely broken by the flapping wings of petrels or puffins.
By this point everything was frozen, even sound.
So the Nautilus had to halt in its venturesome course among these
tracts of ice.
"Sir," Ned Land told me that day, "if your captain goes any farther . . ."
"Yes?"
"He'll be a superman."
"How so, Ned?"
"Because nobody can clear the Ice Bank. Your captain's a
powerful man, but damnation, he isn't more powerful than nature.
If she draws a boundary line, there you stop, like it or not!"
"Correct, Ned Land, but I still want to know what's behind this
Ice Bank! Behold my greatest source of irritation--a wall!"
"Master is right," Conseil said. "Walls were invented simply
to frustrate scientists. All walls should be banned."
"Fine!" the Canadian put in. "But we already know what's behind
this Ice Bank."
"What?" I asked.
"Ice, ice, and more ice."
"You may be sure of that, Ned," I answered, "but I'm not.
That's why I want to see for myself."
"Well, professor," the Canadian replied, "you can just drop that idea!
You've made it to the Ice Bank, which is already far enough,
but you won't get any farther, neither your Captain Nemo or
his Nautilus. And whether he wants to or not, we'll head north again,
in other words, to the land of sensible people."
I had to agree that Ned Land was right, and until ships are built
to navigate over tracts of ice, they'll have to stop at the Ice Bank.
Indeed, despite its efforts, despite the powerful methods it
used to split this ice, the Nautilus was reduced to immobility.
Ordinarily, when someone can't go any farther, he still has
the option of returning in his tracks. But here it was just
as impossible to turn back as to go forward, because every
passageway had closed behind us, and if our submersible remained
even slightly stationary, it would be frozen in without delay.
Which is exactly what happened near two o'clock in the afternoon,
and fresh ice kept forming over the ship's sides with astonishing speed.
I had to admit that Captain Nemo's leadership had been most injudicious.
Just then I was on the platform. Observing the situation for some while,
the captain said to me:
"Well, professor! What think you?"
260
"I think we're trapped, captain."
"Trapped! What do you mean?"
"I mean we can't go forward, backward, or sideways.
I think that's the standard definition of 'trapped,' at least
in the civilized world."
"So, Professor Aronnax, you think the Nautilus won't be able
to float clear?"
"Only with the greatest difficulty, captain, since the season
is already too advanced for you to depend on an ice breakup."
"Oh, professor," Captain Nemo replied in an ironic tone,
"you never change! You see only impediments and obstacles!
I promise you, not only will the Nautilus float clear, it will
go farther still!"
"Farther south?" I asked, gaping at the captain.
"Yes, sir, it will go to the pole."
"To the pole!" I exclaimed, unable to keep back a movement of disbelief.
"Yes," the captain replied coolly, "the Antarctic pole,
that unknown spot crossed by every meridian on the globe.
As you know, I do whatever I like with my Nautilus."
Yes, I did know that! I knew this man was daring to the point
of being foolhardy. But to overcome all the obstacles around
the South Pole--even more unattainable than the North Pole,
which still hadn't been reached by the boldest navigators--
wasn't this an absolutely insane undertaking, one that could occur
only in the brain of a madman?
It then dawned on me to ask Captain Nemo if he had already discovered
this pole, which no human being had ever trod underfoot.
"No, sir," he answered me, "but we'll discover it together.
Where others have failed, I'll succeed. Never before has my
Nautilus cruised so far into these southernmost seas, but I repeat:
it will go farther still."
"I'd like to believe you, captain," I went on in a tone of some sarcasm.
"Oh I do believe you! Let's forge ahead! There are no obstacles for us!
Let's shatter this Ice Bank! Let's blow it up, and if it still resists,
let's put wings on the Nautilus and fly over it!"
"Over it, professor?" Captain Nemo replied serenely.
"No, not over it, but under it."
"Under it!" I exclaimed.
A sudden insight into Captain Nemo's plans had just flashed through
my mind. I understood. The marvelous talents of his Nautilus
would be put to work once again in this superhuman undertaking!
"I can see we're starting to understand each other, professor,"
Captain Nemo told me with a half smile. "You already glimpse
261
the potential--myself, I'd say the success--of this attempt.
Maneuvers that aren't feasible for an ordinary ship are easy for
the Nautilus. If a continent emerges at the pole, we'll stop at
that continent. But on the other hand, if open sea washes the pole,
we'll go to that very place!"
"Right," I said, carried away by the captain's logic.
"Even though the surface of the sea has solidified into ice,
its lower strata are still open, thanks to that divine justice that puts
the maximum density of salt water one degree above its freezing point.
And if I'm not mistaken, the submerged part of this Ice Bank is
in a four-to-one ratio to its emerging part."
"Very nearly, professor. For each foot of iceberg above the sea,
there are three more below. Now then, since these ice mountains don't
exceed a height of 100 meters, they sink only to a depth of 300 meters.
And what are 300 meters to the Nautilus?"
"A mere nothing, sir."
"We could even go to greater depths and find that temperature layer
common to all ocean water, and there we'd brave with impunity
the -30 degrees or -40 degrees cold on the surface."
"True, sir, very true," I replied with growing excitement.
"Our sole difficulty," Captain Nemo went on, "lies in our staying
submerged for several days without renewing our air supply."
"That's all?" I answered. "The Nautilus has huge air tanks;
we'll fill them up and they'll supply all the oxygen we need."
"Good thinking, Professor Aronnax," the captain replied with a smile.
"But since I don't want to be accused of foolhardiness, I'm giving
you all my objections in advance."
"You have more?"
"Just one. If a sea exists at the South Pole, it's possible
this sea may be completely frozen over, so we couldn't come up
to the surface!"
"My dear sir, have you forgotten that the Nautilus is armed
with a fearsome spur? Couldn't it be launched diagonally against
those tracts of ice, which would break open from the impact?"
"Ah, professor, you're full of ideas today!"
"Besides, captain," I added with still greater enthusiasm,
"why wouldn't we find open sea at the South Pole just as at
the North Pole? The cold-temperature poles and the geographical
poles don't coincide in either the northern or southern hemispheres,
and until proof to the contrary, we can assume these two spots
on the earth feature either a continent or an ice-free ocean."
"I think as you do, Professor Aronnax," Captain Nemo replied.
"I'll only point out that after raising so many objections against
my plan, you're now crushing me under arguments in its favor."
Captain Nemo was right. I was outdoing him in daring!
262
It was I who was sweeping him to the pole. I was leading
the way, I was out in front . . . but no, you silly fool!
Captain Nemo already knew the pros and cons of this question,
and it amused him to see you flying off into impossible fantasies!
Nevertheless, he didn't waste an instant. At his signal,
the chief officer appeared. The two men held a quick exchange
in their incomprehensible language, and either the chief officer
had been alerted previously or he found the plan feasible,
because he showed no surprise.
But as unemotional as he was, he couldn't have been more impeccably
emotionless than Conseil when I told the fine lad our intention
of pushing on to the South Pole. He greeted my announcement with
the usual "As master wishes," and I had to be content with that.
As for Ned Land, no human shoulders ever executed a higher shrug
than the pair belonging to our Canadian.
"Honestly, sir," he told me. "You and your Captain Nemo, I
pity you both!"
"But we will go to the pole, Mr. Land."
"Maybe, but you won't come back!"
And Ned Land reentered his cabin, "to keep from doing
something desperate," he said as he left me.
Meanwhile preparations for this daring attempt were getting under way.
The Nautilus's powerful pumps forced air down into the tanks
and stored it under high pressure. Near four o'clock Captain Nemo
informed me that the platform hatches were about to be closed.
I took a last look at the dense Ice Bank we were going to conquer.
The weather was fair, the skies reasonably clear, the cold quite brisk,
namely -12 degrees centigrade; but after the wind had lulled,
this temperature didn't seem too unbearable.
Equipped with picks, some ten men climbed onto the Nautilus's
sides and cracked loose the ice around the ship's lower plating,
which was soon set free. This operation was swiftly executed
because the fresh ice was still thin. We all reentered the interior.
The main ballast tanks were filled with the water that hadn't yet
congealed at our line of flotation. The Nautilus submerged without delay.
I took a seat in the lounge with Conseil. Through the open
window we stared at the lower strata of this southernmost ocean.
The thermometer rose again. The needle on the pressure gauge
swerved over its dial.
About 300 meters down, just as Captain Nemo had predicted,
we cruised beneath the undulating surface of the Ice Bank. But the
Nautilus sank deeper still. It reached a depth of 800 meters.
At the surface this water gave a temperature of -12 degrees centigrade,
but now it gave no more than -10 degrees. Two degrees had already
been gained. Thanks to its heating equipment, the Nautilus's
temperature, needless to say, stayed at a much higher degree.
Every maneuver was accomplished with extraordinary precision.
"With all due respect to master," Conseil told me, "we'll pass it by."
263
"I fully expect to!" I replied in a tone of deep conviction.
Now in open water, the Nautilus took a direct course to the pole
without veering from the 52nd meridian. From 67 degrees 30'
to 90 degrees, twenty-two and a half degrees of latitude were
left to cross, in other words, slightly more than 500 leagues.
The Nautilus adopted an average speed of twenty-six miles per hour,
the speed of an express train. If it kept up this pace, forty hours
would do it for reaching the pole.
For part of the night, the novelty of our circumstances kept Conseil
and me at the lounge window. The sea was lit by our beacon's
electric rays. But the depths were deserted. Fish didn't linger
in these imprisoned waters. Here they found merely a passageway
for going from the Antarctic Ocean to open sea at the pole.
Our progress was swift. You could feel it in the vibrations
of the long steel hull.
Near two o'clock in the morning, I went to snatch a few hours of sleep.
Conseil did likewise. I didn't encounter Captain Nemo while going
down the gangways. I assumed that he was keeping to the pilothouse.
The next day, March 19, at five o'clock in the morning, I was back
at my post in the lounge. The electric log indicated that the
Nautilus had reduced speed. By then it was rising to the surface,
but cautiously, while slowly emptying its ballast tanks.
My heart was pounding. Would we emerge into the open and find
the polar air again?
No. A jolt told me that the Nautilus had bumped the underbelly
of the Ice Bank, still quite thick to judge from the hollowness
of the accompanying noise. Indeed, we had "struck bottom,"
to use nautical terminology, but in the opposite direction
and at a depth of 3,000 feet. That gave us 4,000 feet
of ice overhead, of which 1,000 feet emerged above water.
So the Ice Bank was higher here than we had found it on the outskirts.
A circumstance less than encouraging.
Several times that day, the Nautilus repeated the same experiment and
always it bumped against this surface that formed a ceiling above it.
At certain moments the ship encountered ice at a depth of 900 meters,
denoting a thickness of 1,200 meters, of which 300 meters rose above
the level of the ocean. This height had tripled since the moment
the Nautilus had dived beneath the waves.
I meticulously noted these different depths, obtaining the underwater
profile of this upside-down mountain chain that stretched
beneath the sea.
By evening there was still no improvement in our situation.
The ice stayed between 400 and 500 meters deep. It was obviously
shrinking, but what a barrier still lay between us and the surface
of the ocean!
By then it was eight o'clock. The air inside the Nautilus should have
been renewed four hours earlier, following daily practice on board.
But I didn't suffer very much, although Captain Nemo hadn't yet
made demands on the supplementary oxygen in his air tanks.
264
That night my sleep was fitful. Hope and fear besieged me by turns.
I got up several times. The Nautilus continued groping.
Near three o'clock in the morning, I observed that we encountered
the Ice Bank's underbelly at a depth of only fifty meters.
So only 150 feet separated us from the surface of the water.
Little by little the Ice Bank was turning into an ice field again.
The mountains were changing back into plains.
My eyes didn't leave the pressure gauge. We kept rising on a diagonal,
going along this shiny surface that sparkled beneath our electric rays.
Above and below, the Ice Bank was subsiding in long gradients.
Mile after mile it was growing thinner.
Finally, at six o'clock in the morning on that memorable day of March 19,
the lounge door opened. Captain Nemo appeared.
"Open sea!" he told me.
265
CHAPTER 14
The South Pole
I RUSHED UP onto the platform. Yes, open sea! Barely a few
sparse floes, some moving
icebergs; a sea stretching into the distance; hosts of birds
in the air and myriads of fish under the waters, which varied
from intense blue to olive green depending on the depth.
The thermometer marked 3 degrees centigrade. It was as if a
comparative springtime had been locked up behind that Ice Bank,
whose distant masses were outlined on the northern horizon.
"Are we at the pole?" I asked the captain, my heart pounding.
"I've no idea," he answered me. "At noon we'll fix our position."
"But will the sun show through this mist?" I said, staring at
the grayish sky.
"No matter how faintly it shines, it will be enough for me,"
the captain replied.
To the south, ten miles from the Nautilus, a solitary islet rose
to a height of 200 meters. We proceeded toward it, but cautiously,
because this sea could have been strewn with reefs.
In an hour we had reached the islet. Two hours later we had completed a
full circle around it. It measured four to five miles in circumference.
A narrow channel separated it from a considerable shore,
perhaps a continent whose limits we couldn't see. The existence
of this shore seemed to bear out Commander Maury's hypotheses.
In essence, this ingenious American has noted that between
the South Pole and the 60th parallel, the sea is covered
with floating ice of dimensions much greater than any found
in the north Atlantic. From this fact he drew the conclusion
that the Antarctic Circle must contain considerable shores,
since icebergs can't form on the high seas but only along coastlines.
According to his calculations, this frozen mass enclosing the southernmost
pole forms a vast ice cap whose width must reach 4,000 kilometers.
Meanwhile, to avoid running aground, the Nautilus halted three
cable lengths from a strand crowned by superb piles of rocks.
The skiff was launched to sea. Two crewmen carrying instruments,
the captain, Conseil, and I were on board. It was ten o'clock
in the morning. I hadn't seen Ned Land. No doubt, in the presence
of the South Pole, the Canadian hated having to eat his words.
A few strokes of the oar brought the skiff to the sand,
where it ran aground. Just as Conseil was about to jump ashore,
I held him back.
"Sir," I told Captain Nemo, "to you belongs the honor of first
setting foot on this shore."
"Yes, sir," the captain replied, "and if I have no hesitation
in treading this polar soil, it's because no human being until
now has left a footprint here."
266
So saying, he leaped lightly onto the sand. His heart must
have been throbbing with intense excitement. He scaled an
overhanging rock that ended in a small promontory and there,
mute and motionless, with crossed arms and blazing eyes,
he seemed to be laying claim to these southernmost regions.
After spending five minutes in this trance, he turned to us.
"Whenever you're ready, sir," he called to me.
I got out, Conseil at my heels, leaving the two men in the skiff.
Over an extensive area, the soil consisted of that igneous gravel
called "tuff," reddish in color as if made from crushed bricks.
The ground was covered with slag, lava flows, and pumice stones.
Its volcanic origin was unmistakable. In certain localities thin smoke
holes gave off a sulfurous odor, showing that the inner fires still kept
their wide-ranging power. Nevertheless, when I scaled a high escarpment,
I could see no volcanoes within a radius of several miles.
In these Antarctic districts, as is well known, Sir James Clark Ross
had found the craters of Mt. Erebus and Mt. Terror in fully active
condition on the 167th meridian at latitude 77 degrees 32'.
The vegetation on this desolate continent struck me as quite limited.
A few lichens of the species Usnea melanoxanthra sprawled over
the black rocks. The whole meager flora of this region consisted
of certain microscopic buds, rudimentary diatoms made up of a type
of cell positioned between two quartz-rich shells, plus long purple
and crimson fucus plants, buoyed by small air bladders and washed
up on the coast by the surf.
The beach was strewn with mollusks: small mussels, limpets, smooth
heart-shaped cockles, and especially some sea butterflies with oblong,
membrane-filled bodies whose heads are formed from two rounded lobes.
I also saw myriads of those northernmost sea butterflies three
centimeters long, which a baleen whale can swallow by the thousands
in one gulp. The open waters at the shoreline were alive with
these delightful pteropods, true butterflies of the sea.
Among other zoophytes present in these shallows, there were
a few coral tree forms that, according to Sir James Clark Ross,
live in these Antarctic seas at depths as great as 1,000 meters;
then small alcyon coral belonging to the species Procellaria pelagica,
also a large number of starfish unique to these climes, plus some
feather stars spangling the sand.
But it was in the air that life was superabundant.
There various species of birds flew and fluttered by the thousands,
deafening us with their calls. Crowding the rocks, other fowl watched
without fear as we passed and pressed familiarly against our feet.
These were auks, as agile and supple in water, where they are sometimes
mistaken for fast bonito, as they are clumsy and heavy on land.
They uttered outlandish calls and participated in numerous public
assemblies that featured much noise but little action.
Among other fowl I noted some sheathbills from the wading-bird family,
the size of pigeons, white in color, the beak short and conical, the eyes
framed by red circles. Conseil laid in a supply of them, because when
they're properly cooked, these winged creatures make a pleasant dish.
In the air there passed sooty albatross with four-meter wingspans,
267
birds aptly dubbed "vultures of the ocean," also gigantic petrels
including several with arching wings, enthusiastic eaters of seal
that are known as quebrantahuesos,* and cape pigeons, a sort
of small duck, the tops of their bodies black and white--in short,
a whole series of petrels, some whitish with wings trimmed in brown,
others blue and exclusive to these Antarctic seas, the former "so oily,"
I told Conseil, "that inhabitants of the Faroe Islands simply fit
the bird with a wick, then light it up."
*Spanish: "ospreys." Ed.
"With that minor addition," Conseil replied, "these fowl would make
perfect lamps! After this, we should insist that nature equip them
with wicks in advance!"
Half a mile farther on, the ground was completely riddled with
penguin nests, egg-laying burrows from which numerous birds emerged.
Later Captain Nemo had hundreds of them hunted because their
black flesh is highly edible. They brayed like donkeys.
The size of a goose with slate-colored bodies, white undersides,
and lemon-colored neck bands, these animals let themselves be stoned
to death without making any effort to get away.
Meanwhile the mists didn't clear, and by eleven o'clock the sun
still hadn't made an appearance. Its absence disturbed me.
Without it, no sights were possible. Then how could we tell whether
we had reached the pole?
When I rejoined Captain Nemo, I found him leaning silently against
a piece of rock and staring at the sky. He seemed impatient, baffled.
But what could we do? This daring and powerful man couldn't control
the sun as he did the sea.
Noon arrived without the orb of day appearing for a single instant.
You couldn't even find its hiding place behind the curtain of mist.
And soon this mist began to condense into snow.
"Until tomorrow," the captain said simply; and we went back
to the Nautilus, amid flurries in the air.
During our absence the nets had been spread, and I observed with
fascination the fish just hauled on board. The Antarctic seas
serve as a refuge for an extremely large number of migratory fish
that flee from storms in the subpolar zones, in truth only to slide
down the gullets of porpoises and seals. I noted some one-decimeter
southern bullhead, a species of whitish cartilaginous fish overrun
with bluish gray stripes and armed with stings, then some Antarctic
rabbitfish three feet long, the body very slender, the skin a smooth
silver white, the head rounded, the topside furnished with three fins,
the snout ending in a trunk that curved back toward the mouth.
I sampled its flesh but found it tasteless, despite Conseil's views,
which were largely approving.
The blizzard lasted until the next day. It was impossible to stay
on the platform. From the lounge, where I was writing up the incidents
of this excursion to the polar continent, I could hear the calls
of petrel and albatross cavorting in the midst of the turmoil.
The Nautilus didn't stay idle, and cruising along the coast,
it advanced some ten miles farther south amid the half light left
by the sun as it skimmed the edge of the horizon.
268
The next day, March 20, it stopped snowing. The cold was a little
more brisk. The thermometer marked -2 degrees centigrade.
The mist had cleared, and on that day I hoped our noon sights
could be accomplished.
Since Captain Nemo hadn't yet appeared, only Conseil and I
were taken ashore by the skiff. The soil's nature was still
the same: volcanic. Traces of lava, slag, and basaltic rock
were everywhere, but I couldn't find the crater that had vomited
them up. There as yonder, myriads of birds enlivened this part
of the polar continent. But they had to share their dominion with
huge herds of marine mammals that looked at us with gentle eyes.
These were seals of various species, some stretched out on the ground,
others lying on drifting ice floes, several leaving or reentering
the sea. Having never dealt with man, they didn't run off at
our approach, and I counted enough of them thereabouts to provision
a couple hundred ships.
"Ye gods," Conseil said, "it's fortunate that Ned Land didn't
come with us!"
"Why so, Conseil?"
"Because that madcap hunter would kill every animal here."
"Every animal may be overstating it, but in truth I doubt we could keep
our Canadian friend from harpooning some of these magnificent cetaceans.
Which would be an affront to Captain Nemo, since he hates to slay
harmless beasts needlessly."
"He's right."
"Certainly, Conseil. But tell me, haven't you finished classifying
these superb specimens of marine fauna?"
"Master is well aware," Conseil replied, "that I'm not seasoned in
practical application. When master has told me these animals' names . . ."
"They're seals and walruses."
"Two genera," our scholarly Conseil hastened to say, "that belong
to the family Pinnipedia, order Carnivora, group Unguiculata,
subclass Monodelphia, class Mammalia, branch Vertebrata."
"Very nice, Conseil," I replied, "but these two genera of seals
and walruses are each divided into species, and if I'm not mistaken,
we now have a chance to actually look at them. Let's."
It was eight o'clock in the morning. We had four hours
to ourselves before the sun could be productively observed.
I guided our steps toward a huge bay that made a crescent-shaped
incision in the granite cliffs along the beach.
There, all about us, I swear that the shores and ice floes
were crowded with marine mammals as far as the eye could see,
and I involuntarily looked around for old Proteus, that mythological
shepherd who guarded King Neptune's immense flocks. To be specific,
these were seals. They formed distinct male-and-female groups,
the father watching over his family, the mother suckling her
269
little ones, the stronger youngsters emancipated a few paces away.
When these mammals wanted to relocate, they moved in little jumps made
by contracting their bodies, clumsily helped by their imperfectly
developed flippers, which, as with their manatee relatives,
form actual forearms. In the water, their ideal element, I must say
these animals swim wonderfully thanks to their flexible backbones,
narrow pelvises, close-cropped hair, and webbed feet.
Resting on shore, they assumed extremely graceful positions.
Consequently, their gentle features, their sensitive expressions
equal to those of the loveliest women, their soft, limpid eyes,
their charming poses, led the ancients to glorify them by metamorphosing
the males into sea gods and the females into mermaids.
I drew Conseil's attention to the considerable growth
of the cerebral lobes found in these intelligent cetaceans.
No mammal except man has more abundant cerebral matter.
Accordingly, seals are quite capable of being educated;
they make good pets, and together with certain other naturalists,
I think these animals can be properly trained to perform yeoman
service as hunting dogs for fishermen.
Most of these seals were sleeping on the rocks or the sand.
Among those properly termed seals--which have no external ears,
unlike sea lions whose ears protrude--I observed several varieties
of the species stenorhynchus, three meters long, with white hair,
bulldog heads, and armed with ten teeth in each jaw: four incisors
in both the upper and lower, plus two big canines shaped like the
fleur-de-lis. Among them slithered some sea elephants, a type of seal
with a short, flexible trunk; these are the giants of the species,
with a circumference of twenty feet and a length of ten meters.
They didn't move as we approached.
"Are these animals dangerous?" Conseil asked me.
"Only if they're attacked," I replied. "But when these giant seals
defend their little ones, their fury is dreadful, and it isn't rare
for them to smash a fisherman's longboat to bits."
"They're within their rights," Conseil answered.
"I don't say nay."
Two miles farther on, we were stopped by a promontory that screened
the bay from southerly winds. It dropped straight down to the sea,
and surf foamed against it. From beyond this ridge there came
fearsome bellows, such as a herd of cattle might produce.
"Gracious," Conseil put in, "a choir of bulls?"
"No," I said, "a choir of walruses."
"Are they fighting with each other?"
"Either fighting or playing."
"With all due respect to master, this we must see."
"Then see it we must, Conseil."
And there we were, climbing these blackish rocks amid sudden landslides
270
and over stones slippery with ice. More than once I took a tumble
at the expense of my backside. Conseil, more cautious or more stable,
barely faltered and would help me up, saying:
"If master's legs would kindly adopt a wider stance, master will
keep his balance."
Arriving at the topmost ridge of this promontory, I could see vast
white plains covered with walruses. These animals were playing
among themselves. They were howling not in anger but in glee.
Walruses resemble seals in the shape of their bodies and the arrangement
of their limbs. But their lower jaws lack canines and incisors, and as
for their upper canines, they consist of two tusks eighty centimeters
long with a circumference of thirty-three centimeters at the socket.
Made of solid ivory, without striations, harder than elephant tusks,
and less prone to yellowing, these teeth are in great demand.
Accordingly, walruses are the victims of a mindless hunting that
soon will destroy them all, since their hunters indiscriminately
slaughter pregnant females and youngsters, and over 4,000 individuals
are destroyed annually.
Passing near these unusual animals, I could examine them at my
leisure since they didn't stir. Their hides were rough and heavy,
a tan color leaning toward a reddish brown; their coats were
short and less than abundant. Some were four meters long.
More tranquil and less fearful than their northern relatives,
they posted no sentinels on guard duty at the approaches
to their campsite.
After examining this community of walruses, I decided to return in
my tracks. It was eleven o'clock, and if Captain Nemo found conditions
favorable for taking his sights, I wanted to be present at the operation.
But I held no hopes that the sun would make an appearance that day.
It was hidden from our eyes by clouds squeezed together on the horizon.
Apparently the jealous orb didn't want to reveal this inaccessible
spot on the globe to any human being.
Yet I decided to return to the Nautilus. We went along a steep,
narrow path that ran over the cliff's summit. By 11:30 we had arrived
at our landing place. The beached skiff had brought the captain ashore.
I spotted him standing on a chunk of basalt. His instruments
were beside him. His eyes were focused on the northern horizon,
along which the sun was sweeping in its extended arc.
I found a place near him and waited without speaking. Noon arrived,
and just as on the day before, the sun didn't put in an appearance.
It was sheer bad luck. Our noon sights were still lacking.
If we couldn't obtain them tomorrow, we would finally have to give
up any hope of fixing our position.
In essence, it was precisely March 20. Tomorrow, the 21st,
was the day of the equinox; the sun would disappear below the horizon
for six months not counting refraction, and after its disappearance
the long polar night would begin. Following the September equinox,
the sun had emerged above the northerly horizon, rising in long
spirals until December 21. At that time, the summer solstice
of these southernmost districts, the sun had started back down,
and tomorrow it would cast its last rays.
271
I shared my thoughts and fears with Captain Nemo.
"You're right, Professor Aronnax," he told me. "If I can't take the sun's
altitude tomorrow, I won't be able to try again for another six months.
But precisely because sailors' luck has led me into these seas
on March 21, it will be easy to get our bearings if the noonday
sun does appear before our eyes."
"Why easy, captain?"
"Because when the orb of day sweeps in such long spirals,
it's difficult to measure its exact altitude above the horizon,
and our instruments are open to committing serious errors."
"Then what can you do?"
"I use only my chronometer," Captain Nemo answered me.
"At noon tomorrow, March 21, if, after accounting for refraction,
the sun's disk is cut exactly in half by the northern horizon,
that will mean I'm at the South Pole."
"Right," I said. "Nevertheless, it isn't mathematically exact proof,
because the equinox needn't fall precisely at noon."
"No doubt, sir, but the error will be under 100 meters, and that's
close enough for us. Until tomorrow then."
Captain Nemo went back on board. Conseil and I stayed behind
until five o'clock, surveying the beach, observing and studying.
The only unusual object I picked up was an auk's egg of remarkable size,
for which a collector would have paid more than 1,000 francs.
Its cream-colored tint, plus the streaks and markings that
decorated it like so many hieroglyphics, made it a rare trinket.
I placed it in Conseil's hands, and holding it like precious
porcelain from China, that cautious, sure-footed lad got it back
to the Nautilus in one piece.
There I put this rare egg inside one of the glass cases in the museum.
I ate supper, feasting with appetite on an excellent piece of seal
liver whose flavor reminded me of pork. Then I went to bed;
but not without praying, like a good Hindu, for the favors of
the radiant orb.
The next day, March 21, bright and early at five o'clock in the morning,
I climbed onto the platform. I found Captain Nemo there.
"The weather is clearing a bit," he told me. "I have high hopes.
After breakfast we'll make our way ashore and choose an observation post."
This issue settled, I went to find Ned Land. I wanted to take him
with me. The obstinate Canadian refused, and I could clearly see
that his tight-lipped mood and his bad temper were growing by the day.
Under the circumstances I ultimately wasn't sorry that he refused.
In truth, there were too many seals ashore, and it would never do
to expose this impulsive fisherman to such temptations.
Breakfast over, I made my way ashore. The Nautilus had gone a few
more miles during the night. It lay well out, a good league from
the coast, which was crowned by a sharp peak 400 to 500 meters high.
272
In addition to me, the skiff carried Captain Nemo, two crewmen,
and the instruments--in other words, a chronometer, a spyglass,
and a barometer.
During our crossing I saw numerous baleen whales belonging to the
three species unique to these southernmost seas: the bowhead whale
(or "right whale," according to the English), which has no dorsal fin;
the humpback whale from the genus Balaenoptera (in other words,
"winged whales"), beasts with wrinkled bellies and huge whitish
fins that, genus name regardless, do not yet form wings;
and the finback whale, yellowish brown, the swiftest of all cetaceans.
This powerful animal is audible from far away when it sends up
towering spouts of air and steam that resemble swirls of smoke.
Herds of these different mammals were playing about in the
tranquil waters, and I could easily see that this Antarctic polar
basin now served as a refuge for those cetaceans too relentlessly
pursued by hunters.
I also noted long, whitish strings of salps, a type of mollusk
found in clusters, and some jellyfish of large size that swayed
in the eddies of the billows.
By nine o'clock we had pulled up to shore. The sky was growing brighter.
Clouds were fleeing to the south. Mists were rising from
the cold surface of the water. Captain Nemo headed toward
the peak, which he no doubt planned to make his observatory.
It was an arduous climb over sharp lava and pumice stones in the midst
of air often reeking with sulfurous fumes from the smoke holes.
For a man out of practice at treading land, the captain scaled
the steepest slopes with a supple agility I couldn't equal,
and which would have been envied by hunters of Pyrenees mountain goats.
It took us two hours to reach the summit of this half-crystal,
half-basalt peak. From there our eyes scanned a vast sea, which scrawled
its boundary line firmly against the background of the northern sky.
At our feet: dazzling tracts of white. Over our heads:
a pale azure, clear of mists. North of us: the sun's disk,
like a ball of fire already cut into by the edge of the horizon.
From the heart of the waters: jets of liquid rising like hundreds
of magnificent bouquets. Far off, like a sleeping cetacean:
the Nautilus. Behind us to the south and east: an immense shore,
a chaotic heap of rocks and ice whose limits we couldn't see.
Arriving at the summit of this peak, Captain Nemo carefully determined
its elevation by means of his barometer, since he had to take this
factor into account in his noon sights.
At 11:45 the sun, by then seen only by refraction, looked like a
golden disk, dispersing its last rays over this deserted continent
and down to these seas not yet plowed by the ships of man.
Captain Nemo had brought a spyglass with a reticular eyepiece,
which corrected the sun's refraction by means of a mirror,
and he used it to observe the orb sinking little by little
along a very extended diagonal that reached below the horizon.
I held the chronometer. My heart was pounding mightily.
If the lower half of the sun's disk disappeared just as the chronometer
said noon, we were right at the pole.
"Noon!" I called.
273
"The South Pole!" Captain Nemo replied in a solemn voice,
handing me the spyglass, which showed the orb of day cut into two
exactly equal parts by the horizon.
I stared at the last rays wreathing this peak, while shadows were
gradually climbing its gradients.
Just then, resting his hand on my shoulder, Captain Nemo said to me:
"In 1600, sir, the Dutchman Gheritk was swept by storms
and currents, reaching latitude 64 degrees south and discovering
the South Shetland Islands. On January 17, 1773, the famous Captain Cook
went along the 38th meridian, arriving at latitude 67 degrees 30';
and on January 30, 1774, along the 109th meridian, he reached
latitude 71 degrees 15'. In 1819 the Russian Bellinghausen lay on
the 69th parallel, and in 1821 on the 66th at longitude 111 degrees west.
In 1820 the Englishman Bransfield stopped at 65 degrees.
That same year the American Morrel, whose reports are dubious,
went along the 42nd meridian, finding open sea at latitude 70 degrees
14'. In 1825 the Englishman Powell was unable to get beyond 62 degrees.
That same year a humble seal fisherman, the Englishman Weddell,
went as far as latitude 72 degrees 14' on the 35th meridian, and as
far as 74 degrees 15' on the 36th. In 1829 the Englishman Forster,
commander of the Chanticleer, laid claim to the Antarctic continent
in latitude 63 degrees 26' and longitude 66 degrees 26'. On February 1,
1831, the Englishman Biscoe discovered Enderby Land at latitude 68
degrees 50', Adelaide Land at latitude 67 degrees on February 5,
1832, and Graham Land at latitude 64 degrees 45' on February 21.
In 1838 the Frenchman Dumont d'Urville stopped at the Ice Bank
in latitude 62 degrees 57', sighting the Louis-Philippe Peninsula;
on January 21 two years later, at a new southerly position of 66
degrees 30', he named the Adélie Coast and eight days later,
the Clarie Coast at 64 degrees 40'. In 1838 the American Wilkes
advanced as far as the 69th parallel on the 100th meridian.
In 1839 the Englishman Balleny discovered the Sabrina Coast at the edge
of the polar circle. Lastly, on January 12, 1842, with his ships,
the Erebus and the Terror, the Englishman Sir James Clark Ross found
Victoria Land in latitude 70 degrees 56' and longitude 171 degrees 7'
east; on the 23rd of that same month, he reached the 74th parallel,
a position denoting the Farthest South attained until then;
on the 27th he lay at 76 degrees 8'; on the 28th at 77 degrees 32';
on February 2 at 78 degrees 4'; and late in 1842 he returned to 71
degrees but couldn't get beyond it. Well now! In 1868, on this 21st
day of March, I myself, Captain Nemo, have reached the South Pole
at 90 degrees, and I hereby claim this entire part of the globe,
equal to one-sixth of the known continents."
"In the name of which sovereign, captain?"
"In my own name, sir!"
So saying, Captain Nemo unfurled a black flag bearing a gold "N"
on its quartered bunting. Then, turning toward the orb of day,
whose last rays were licking at the sea's horizon:
"Farewell, O sun!" he called. "Disappear, O radiant orb!
Retire beneath this open sea, and let six months of night spread
their shadows over my new domains!"
274
CHAPTER 15
Accident or Incident?
THE NEXT DAY, March 22, at six o'clock in the morning, preparations for
departure began. The last gleams of twilight were melting into night.
The cold was brisk. The constellations were glittering with
startling intensity. The wonderful Southern Cross, polar star
of the Antarctic regions, twinkled at its zenith.
The thermometer marked -12 degrees centigrade, and a fresh breeze
left a sharp nip in the air. Ice floes were increasing over
the open water. The sea was starting to congeal everywhere.
Numerous blackish patches were spreading over its surface,
announcing the imminent formation of fresh ice. Obviously this
southernmost basin froze over during its six-month winter and became
utterly inaccessible. What happened to the whales during this period?
No doubt they went beneath the Ice Bank to find more feasible seas.
As for seals and walruses, they were accustomed to living
in the harshest climates and stayed on in these icy waterways.
These animals know by instinct how to gouge holes in the ice fields
and keep them continually open; they go to these holes to breathe.
Once the birds have migrated northward to escape the cold,
these marine mammals remain as sole lords of the polar continent.
Meanwhile the ballast tanks filled with water and the Nautilus
sank slowly. At a depth of 1,000 feet, it stopped. Its propeller churned
the waves and it headed due north at a speed of fifteen miles per hour.
Near the afternoon it was already cruising under the immense frozen
carapace of the Ice Bank.
As a precaution, the panels in the lounge stayed closed,
because the Nautilus's hull could run afoul of some submerged block
of ice. So I spent the day putting my notes into final form.
My mind was completely wrapped up in my memories of the pole.
We had reached that inaccessible spot without facing exhaustion
or danger, as if our seagoing passenger carriage had glided there on
railroad tracks. And now we had actually started our return journey.
Did it still have comparable surprises in store for me? I felt sure
it did, so inexhaustible is this series of underwater wonders!
As it was, in the five and a half months since fate had brought us
on board, we had cleared 14,000 leagues, and over this track longer
than the earth's equator, so many fascinating or frightening incidents
had beguiled our voyage: that hunting trip in the Crespo forests,
our running aground in the Torres Strait, the coral cemetery,
the pearl fisheries of Ceylon, the Arabic tunnel, the fires of Santorini,
those millions in the Bay of Vigo, Atlantis, the South Pole! During the
night all these memories crossed over from one dream to the next,
not giving my brain a moment's rest.
At three o'clock in the morning, I was awakened by a violent collision.
I sat up in bed, listening in the darkness, and then was suddenly
hurled into the middle of my stateroom. Apparently the Nautilus
had gone aground, then heeled over sharply.
Leaning against the walls, I dragged myself down the gangways
to the lounge, whose ceiling lights were on. The furniture had been
knocked over. Fortunately the glass cases were solidly secured
at the base and had stood fast. Since we were no longer vertical,
275
the starboard pictures were glued to the tapestries, while those
to port had their lower edges hanging a foot away from the wall.
So the Nautilus was lying on its starboard side, completely
stationary to boot.
In its interior I heard the sound of footsteps and muffled voices.
But Captain Nemo didn't appear. Just as I was about to leave
the lounge, Ned Land and Conseil entered.
"What happened?" I instantly said to them.
"I came to ask master that," Conseil replied.
"Damnation!" the Canadian exclaimed. "I know full well what happened!
The Nautilus has gone aground, and judging from the way it's listing,
I don't think it'll pull through like that first time in
the Torres Strait."
"But," I asked, "are we at least back on the surface of the sea?"
"We have no idea," Conseil replied.
"It's easy to find out," I answered.
I consulted the pressure gauge. Much to my surprise, it indicated
a depth of 360 meters.
"What's the meaning of this?" I exclaimed.
"We must confer with Captain Nemo," Conseil said.
"But where do we find him?" Ned Land asked.
"Follow me," I told my two companions.
We left the lounge. Nobody in the library. Nobody by the central
companionway or the crew's quarters. I assumed that Captain Nemo
was stationed in the pilothouse. Best to wait. The three of us
returned to the lounge.
I'll skip over the Canadian's complaints. He had good grounds
for an outburst. I didn't answer him back, letting him blow off
all the steam he wanted.
We had been left to ourselves for twenty minutes, trying to detect
the tiniest noises inside the Nautilus, when Captain Nemo entered.
He didn't seem to see us. His facial features, usually so emotionless,
revealed a certain uneasiness. He studied the compass and pressure
gauge in silence, then went and put his finger on the world map
at a spot in the sector depicting the southernmost seas.
I hesitated to interrupt him. But some moments later, when he turned
to me, I threw back at him a phrase he had used in the Torres Strait:
"An incident, captain?"
"No, sir," he replied, "this time an accident."
"Serious?"
276
"Perhaps."
"Is there any immediate danger?"
"No."
"The Nautilus has run aground?"
"Yes."
"And this accident came about . . . ?"
"Through nature's unpredictability not man's incapacity.
No errors were committed in our maneuvers. Nevertheless, we can't
prevent a loss of balance from taking its toll. One may defy
human laws, but no one can withstand the laws of nature."
Captain Nemo had picked an odd time to philosophize. All in all,
this reply told me nothing.
"May I learn, sir," I asked him, "what caused this accident?"
"An enormous block of ice, an entire mountain, has toppled over,"
he answered me. "When an iceberg is eroded at the base by warmer
waters or by repeated collisions, its center of gravity rises.
Then it somersaults, it turns completely upside down.
That's what happened here. When it overturned, one of these
blocks hit the Nautilus as it was cruising under the waters.
Sliding under our hull, this block then raised us with irresistible power,
lifting us into less congested strata where we now lie on our side."
"But can't we float the Nautilus clear by emptying its ballast tanks,
to regain our balance?"
"That, sir, is being done right now. You can hear the pumps working.
Look at the needle on the pressure gauge. It indicates that the Nautilus
is rising, but this block of ice is rising with us, and until some
obstacle halts its upward movement, our position won't change."
Indeed, the Nautilus kept the same heel to starboard.
No doubt it would straighten up once the block came to a halt.
But before that happened, who knew if we might not hit the underbelly
of the Ice Bank and be hideously squeezed between two frozen surfaces?
I mused on all the consequences of this situation. Captain Nemo
didn't stop studying the pressure gauge. Since the toppling
of this iceberg, the Nautilus had risen about 150 feet, but it
still stayed at the same angle to the perpendicular.
Suddenly a slight movement could be felt over the hull.
Obviously the Nautilus was straightening a bit. Objects hanging
in the lounge were visibly returning to their normal positions.
The walls were approaching the vertical. Nobody said a word.
Hearts pounding, we could see and feel the ship righting itself.
The floor was becoming horizontal beneath our feet.
Ten minutes went by.
"Finally, we're upright!" I exclaimed.
"Yes," Captain Nemo said, heading to the lounge door.
277
"But will we float off?" I asked him.
"Certainly," he replied, "since the ballast tanks aren't yet empty,
and when they are, the Nautilus must rise to the surface of the sea."
The captain went out, and soon I saw that at his orders, the Nautilus
had halted its upward movement. In fact, it soon would have hit
the underbelly of the Ice Bank, but it had stopped in time and was
floating in midwater.
"That was a close call!" Conseil then said.
"Yes. We could have been crushed between these masses of ice,
or at least imprisoned between them. And then, with no way to renew
our air supply. . . . Yes, that was a close call!"
"If it's over with!" Ned Land muttered.
I was unwilling to get into a pointless argument with the Canadian
and didn't reply. Moreover, the panels opened just then,
and the outside light burst through the uncovered windows.
We were fully afloat, as I have said; but on both sides of the Nautilus,
about ten meters away, there rose dazzling walls of ice.
There also were walls above and below. Above, because the
Ice Bank's underbelly spread over us like an immense ceiling.
Below, because the somersaulting block, shifting little by little,
had found points of purchase on both side walls and had gotten
jammed between them. The Nautilus was imprisoned in a genuine
tunnel of ice about twenty meters wide and filled with quiet water.
So the ship could easily exit by going either ahead or astern,
sinking a few hundred meters deeper, and then taking an open
passageway beneath the Ice Bank.
The ceiling lights were off, yet the lounge was still brightly lit.
This was due to the reflecting power of the walls of ice,
which threw the beams of our beacon right back at us. Words cannot
describe the effects produced by our galvanic rays on these huge,
whimsically sculpted blocks, whose every angle, ridge, and facet gave
off a different glow depending on the nature of the veins running
inside the ice. It was a dazzling mine of gems, in particular
sapphires and emeralds, whose jets of blue and green crisscrossed.
Here and there, opaline hues of infinite subtlety raced among sparks
of light that were like so many fiery diamonds, their brilliance
more than any eye could stand. The power of our beacon was increased
a hundredfold, like a lamp shining through the biconvex lenses
of a world-class lighthouse.
"How beautiful!" Conseil exclaimed.
"Yes," I said, "it's a wonderful sight! Isn't it, Ned?"
"Oh damnation, yes!" Ned Land shot back. "It's superb!
I'm furious that I have to admit it. Nobody has ever seen the like.
But this sight could cost us dearly. And in all honesty, I think
we're looking at things God never intended for human eyes."
Ned was right. It was too beautiful. All at once a yell from
Conseil made me turn around.
278
"What is it?" I asked.
"Master must close his eyes! Master mustn't look!"
With that, Conseil clapped his hands over his eyes.
"But what's wrong, my boy?"
"I've been dazzled, struck blind!"
Involuntarily my eyes flew to the window, but I couldn't stand
the fire devouring it.
I realized what had happened. The Nautilus had just started off
at great speed. All the tranquil glimmers of the ice walls had then
changed into blazing streaks. The sparkles from these myriads of
diamonds were merging with each other. Swept along by its propeller,
the Nautilus was traveling through a sheath of flashing light.
Then the panels in the lounge closed. We kept our hands over our eyes,
which were utterly saturated with those concentric gleams that
swirl before the retina when sunlight strikes it too intensely.
It took some time to calm our troubled vision.
Finally we lowered our hands.
"Ye gods, I never would have believed it," Conseil said.
"And I still don't believe it!" the Canadian shot back.
"When we return to shore, jaded from all these natural wonders,"
Conseil added, "think how we'll look down on those pitiful land masses,
those puny works of man! No, the civilized world won't be good
enough for us!"
Such words from the lips of this emotionless Flemish boy showed
that our enthusiasm was near the boiling point. But the Canadian
didn't fail to throw his dram of cold water over us.
"The civilized world!" he said, shaking his head. "Don't worry,
Conseil my friend, we're never going back to that world!"
By this point it was five o'clock in the morning.
Just then there was a collision in the Nautilus's bow.
I realized that its spur had just bumped a block of ice.
It must have been a faulty maneuver because this underwater tunnel
was obstructed by such blocks and didn't make for easy navigating.
So I had assumed that Captain Nemo, in adjusting his course, would go
around each obstacle or would hug the walls and follow the windings
of the tunnel. In either case our forward motion wouldn't receive
an absolute check. Nevertheless, contrary to my expectations,
the Nautilus definitely began to move backward.
"We're going astern?" Conseil said.
"Yes," I replied. "Apparently the tunnel has no way out at this end."
"And so . . . ?"
279
"So," I said, "our maneuvers are quite simple. We'll return in our
tracks and go out the southern opening. That's all."
As I spoke, I tried to sound more confident than I really felt.
Meanwhile the Nautilus accelerated its backward movement, and running
with propeller in reverse, it swept us along at great speed.
"This'll mean a delay," Ned said.
"What are a few hours more or less, so long as we get out."
"Yes," Ned Land repeated, "so long as we get out!"
I strolled for a little while from the lounge into the library.
My companions kept their seats and didn't move. Soon I threw myself
down on a couch and picked up a book, which my eyes skimmed mechanically.
A quarter of an hour later, Conseil approached me, saying:
"Is it deeply fascinating, this volume master is reading?"
"Tremendously fascinating," I replied.
"I believe it. Master is reading his own book!"
"My own book?"
Indeed, my hands were holding my own work on the great ocean depths.
I hadn't even suspected. I closed the book and resumed my strolling.
Ned and Conseil stood up to leave.
"Stay here, my friends," I said, stopping them. "Let's stay together
until we're out of this blind alley."
"As master wishes," Conseil replied.
The hours passed. I often studied the instruments hanging on
the lounge wall. The pressure gauge indicated that the Nautilus
stayed at a constant depth of 300 meters, the compass that it kept
heading south, the log that it was traveling at a speed of twenty
miles per hour, an excessive speed in such a cramped area.
But Captain Nemo knew that by this point there was no such thing
as too fast, since minutes were now worth centuries.
At 8:25 a second collision took place. This time astern.
I grew pale. My companions came over. I clutched Conseil's hand.
Our eyes questioned each other, and more directly than if our thoughts
had been translated into words.
Just then the captain entered the lounge. I went to him.
"Our path is barred to the south?" I asked him.
"Yes, sir. When it overturned, that iceberg closed off every exit."
"We're boxed in?"
"Yes."
280
CHAPTER 16
Shortage of Air
CONSEQUENTLY, above, below, and around the Nautilus, there were
impenetrable frozen walls. We were the Ice Bank's prisoners!
The Canadian banged a table with his fearsome fist. Conseil kept still.
I stared at the captain. His face had resumed its usual emotionlessness.
He crossed his arms. He pondered. The Nautilus did not stir.
The captain then broke into speech:
"Gentlemen," he said in a calm voice, "there are two ways of dying
under the conditions in which we're placed."
This inexplicable individual acted like a mathematics professor
working out a problem for his pupils.
"The first way," he went on, "is death by crushing. The second
is death by asphyxiation. I don't mention the possibility of death
by starvation because the Nautilus's provisions will certainly last
longer than we will. Therefore, let's concentrate on our chances
of being crushed or asphyxiated."
"As for asphyxiation, captain," I replied, "that isn't a cause
for alarm, because the air tanks are full."
"True," Captain Nemo went on, "but they'll supply air for only two days.
Now then, we've been buried beneath the waters for thirty-six hours,
and the Nautilus's heavy atmosphere already needs renewing.
In another forty-eight hours, our reserve air will be used up."
"Well then, captain, let's free ourselves within forty-eight hours!"
"We'll try to at least, by cutting through one of these
walls surrounding us."
"Which one?" I asked.
"Borings will tell us that. I'm going to ground the Nautilus
on the lower shelf, then my men will put on their diving suits
and attack the thinnest of these ice walls."
"Can the panels in the lounge be left open?"
"Without ill effect. We're no longer in motion."
Captain Nemo went out. Hissing sounds soon told me that water
was being admitted into the ballast tanks. The Nautilus slowly
settled and rested on the icy bottom at a depth of 350 meters,
the depth at which the lower shelf of ice lay submerged.
"My friends," I said, "we're in a serious predicament, but I'm
counting on your courage and energy."
"Sir," the Canadian replied, "this is no time to bore you with
my complaints. I'm ready to do anything I can for the common good."
"Excellent, Ned," I said, extending my hand to the Canadian.
281
"I might add," he went on, "that I'm as handy with a pick as a harpoon.
If I can be helpful to the captain, he can use me any way he wants."
"He won't turn down your assistance. Come along, Ned."
I led the Canadian to the room where the Nautilus's men were putting
on their diving suits. I informed the captain of Ned's proposition,
which was promptly accepted. The Canadian got into his
underwater costume and was ready as soon as his fellow workers.
Each of them carried on his back a Rouquayrol device that the air
tanks had supplied with a generous allowance of fresh oxygen.
A considerable but necessary drain on the Nautilus's reserves.
As for the Ruhmkorff lamps, they were unnecessary in the midst
of these brilliant waters saturated with our electric rays.
After Ned was dressed, I reentered the lounge, whose windows had
been uncovered; stationed next to Conseil, I examined the strata
surrounding and supporting the Nautilus.
Some moments later, we saw a dozen crewmen set foot on the shelf
of ice, among them Ned Land, easily recognized by his tall figure.
Captain Nemo was with them.
Before digging into the ice, the captain had to obtain borings,
to insure working in the best direction. Long bores were driven into
the side walls; but after fifteen meters, the instruments were still
impeded by the thickness of those walls. It was futile to attack
the ceiling since that surface was the Ice Bank itself, more than
400 meters high. Captain Nemo then bored into the lower surface.
There we were separated from the sea by a ten-meter barrier.
That's how thick the iceberg was. From this point on, it was an issue
of cutting out a piece equal in surface area to the Nautilus's waterline.
This meant detaching about 6,500 cubic meters, to dig a hole through
which the ship could descend below this tract of ice.
Work began immediately and was carried on with tireless tenacity.
Instead of digging all around the Nautilus, which would have
entailed even greater difficulties, Captain Nemo had an immense
trench outlined on the ice, eight meters from our port quarter.
Then his men simultaneously staked it off at several points around
its circumference. Soon their picks were vigorously attacking
this compact matter, and huge chunks were loosened from its mass.
These chunks weighed less than the water, and by an unusual
effect of specific gravity, each chunk took wing, as it were,
to the roof of the tunnel, which thickened above by as much as it
diminished below. But this hardly mattered so long as the lower
surface kept growing thinner.
After two hours of energetic work, Ned Land reentered, exhausted.
He and his companions were replaced by new workmen, including Conseil
and me. The Nautilus's chief officer supervised us.
The water struck me as unusually cold, but I warmed up promptly
while wielding my pick. My movements were quite free, although they
were executed under a pressure of thirty atmospheres.
After two hours of work, reentering to snatch some food and rest,
I found a noticeable difference between the clean elastic fluid
supplied me by the Rouquayrol device and the Nautilus's atmosphere,
282
which was already charged with carbon dioxide. The air hadn't
been renewed in forty-eight hours, and its life-giving qualities
were considerably weakened. Meanwhile, after twelve hours had
gone by, we had removed from the outlined surface area a slice
of ice only one meter thick, hence about 600 cubic meters.
Assuming the same work would be accomplished every twelve hours,
it would still take five nights and four days to see the undertaking
through to completion.
"Five nights and four days!" I told my companions. "And we have
oxygen in the air tanks for only two days."
"Without taking into account," Ned answered, "that once we're out
of this damned prison, we'll still be cooped up beneath the Ice Bank,
without any possible contact with the open air!"
An apt remark. For who could predict the minimum time we would need
to free ourselves? Before the Nautilus could return to the surface
of the waves, couldn't we all die of asphyxiation? Were this
ship and everyone on board doomed to perish in this tomb of ice?
It was a dreadful state of affairs. But we faced it head-on,
each one of us determined to do his duty to the end.
During the night, in line with my forecasts, a new one-meter
slice was removed from this immense socket. But in the morning,
wearing my diving suit, I was crossing through the liquid mass
in a temperature of -6 degrees to -7 degrees centigrade, when I noted
that little by little the side walls were closing in on each other.
The liquid strata farthest from the trench, not warmed by the movements
of workmen and tools, were showing a tendency to solidify.
In the face of this imminent new danger, what would happen to our
chances for salvation, and how could we prevent this liquid medium
from solidifying, then cracking the Nautilus's hull like glass?
I didn't tell my two companions about this new danger.
There was no point in dampening the energy they were putting
into our arduous rescue work. But when I returned on board,
I mentioned this serious complication to Captain Nemo.
"I know," he told me in that calm tone the most dreadful outlook
couldn't change. "It's one more danger, but I don't know any way
of warding it off. Our sole chance for salvation is to work faster
than the water solidifies. We've got to get there first, that's all."
Get there first! By then I should have been used to this type of talk!
For several hours that day, I wielded my pick doggedly.
The work kept me going. Besides, working meant leaving the Nautilus,
which meant breathing the clean oxygen drawn from the air tanks
and supplied by our equipment, which meant leaving the thin,
foul air behind.
Near evening one more meter had been dug from the trench.
When I returned on board, I was wellnigh asphyxiated by the carbon
dioxide saturating the air. Oh, if only we had the chemical
methods that would enable us to drive out this noxious gas!
There was no lack of oxygen. All this water contained a considerable
amount, and after it was decomposed by our powerful batteries,
this life-giving elastic fluid could have been restored to us.
I had thought it all out, but to no avail because the carbon dioxide
283
produced by our breathing permeated every part of the ship.
To absorb it, we would need to fill containers with potassium
hydroxide and shake them continually. But this substance was missing
on board and nothing else could replace it.
That evening Captain Nemo was forced to open the spigots of his air tanks
and shoot a few spouts of fresh oxygen through the Nautilus's interior.
Without this precaution we wouldn't have awakened the following morning.
The next day, March 26, I returned to my miner's trade, working to
remove the fifth meter. The Ice Bank's side walls and underbelly
had visibly thickened. Obviously they would come together before
the Nautilus could break free. For an instant I was gripped by despair.
My pick nearly slipped from my hands. What was the point of this
digging if I was to die smothered and crushed by this water turning
to stone, a torture undreamed of by even the wildest savages!
I felt like I was lying in the jaws of a fearsome monster,
jaws irresistibly closing.
Supervising our work, working himself, Captain Nemo passed near me
just then. I touched him with my hand and pointed to the walls
of our prison. The starboard wall had moved forward to a point
less than four meters from the Nautilus's hull.
The captain understood and gave me a signal to follow him.
We returned on board. My diving suit removed, I went with him
to the lounge.
"Professor Aronnax," he told me, "this calls for heroic measures,
or we'll be sealed up in this solidified water as if it were cement."
"Yes!" I said. "But what can we do?"
"Oh," he exclaimed, "if only my Nautilus were strong enough to stand
that much pressure without being crushed!"
"Well?" I asked, not catching the captain's meaning.
"Don't you understand," he went on, "that the congealing of this
water could come to our rescue? Don't you see that by solidifying,
it could burst these tracts of ice imprisoning us, just as its freezing
can burst the hardest stones? Aren't you aware that this force could
be the instrument of our salvation rather than our destruction?"
"Yes, captain, maybe so. But whatever resistance to crushing
the Nautilus may have, it still couldn't stand such dreadful pressures,
and it would be squashed as flat as a piece of sheet iron."
"I know it, sir. So we can't rely on nature to rescue us,
only our own efforts. We must counteract this solidification.
We must hold it in check. Not only are the side walls closing in,
but there aren't ten feet of water ahead or astern of the Nautilus.
All around us, this freeze is gaining fast."
"How long," I asked, "will the oxygen in the air tanks enable us
to breathe on board?"
The captain looked me straight in the eye.
"After tomorrow," he said, "the air tanks will be empty!"
284
I broke out in a cold sweat. But why should I have been
startled by this reply? On March 22 the Nautilus had dived
under the open waters at the pole. It was now the 26th.
We had lived off the ship's stores for five days!
And all remaining breathable air had to be saved for the workmen.
Even today as I write these lines, my sensations are so intense
that an involuntary terror sweeps over me, and my lungs still seem
short of air!
Meanwhile, motionless and silent, Captain Nemo stood lost in thought.
An idea visibly crossed his mind. But he seemed to brush it aside.
He told himself no. At last these words escaped his lips:
"Boiling water!" he muttered.
"Boiling water?" I exclaimed.
"Yes, sir. We're shut up in a relatively confined area.
If the Nautilus's pumps continually injected streams of boiling
water into this space, wouldn't that raise its temperature and
delay its freezing?"
"It's worth trying!" I said resolutely.
"So let's try it, professor."
By then the thermometer gave -7 degrees centigrade outside.
Captain Nemo led me to the galley where a huge distilling
mechanism was at work, supplying drinking water via evaporation.
The mechanism was loaded with water, and the full electric
heat of our batteries was thrown into coils awash in liquid.
In a few minutes the water reached 100 degrees centigrade.
It was sent to the pumps while new water replaced it in the process.
The heat generated by our batteries was so intense that after simply
going through the mechanism, water drawn cold from the sea arrived
boiling hot at the body of the pump.
The steaming water was injected into the icy water outside,
and after three hours had passed, the thermometer gave the exterior
temperature as -6 degrees centigrade. That was one degree gained.
Two hours later the thermometer gave only -4 degrees.
After I monitored the operation's progress, double-checking it
with many inspections, I told the captain, "It's working."
"I think so," he answered me. "We've escaped being crushed.
Now we have only asphyxiation to fear."
During the night the water temperature rose to -1 degrees centigrade.
The injections couldn't get it to go a single degree higher.
But since salt water freezes only at -2 degrees, I was finally
assured that there was no danger of it solidifying.
By the next day, March 27, six meters of ice had been torn
from the socket. Only four meters were left to be removed.
That still meant forty-eight hours of work. The air couldn't
be renewed in the Nautilus's interior. Accordingly, that day it
kept getting worse.
285
An unbearable heaviness weighed me down. Near three o'clock in
the afternoon, this agonizing sensation affected me to an intense degree.
Yawns dislocated my jaws. My lungs were gasping in their quest
for that enkindling elastic fluid required for breathing,
now growing scarcer and scarcer. My mind was in a daze.
I lay outstretched, strength gone, nearly unconscious.
My gallant Conseil felt the same symptoms, suffered the same sufferings,
yet never left my side. He held my hand, he kept encouraging me,
and I even heard him mutter:
"Oh, if only I didn't have to breathe, to leave more air for master!"
It brought tears to my eyes to hear him say these words.
Since conditions inside were universally unbearable, how eagerly,
how happily, we put on our diving suits to take our turns working!
Picks rang out on that bed of ice. Arms grew weary, hands were
rubbed raw, but who cared about exhaustion, what difference were wounds?
Life-sustaining air reached our lungs! We could breathe!
We could breathe!
And yet nobody prolonged his underwater work beyond the time
allotted him. His shift over, each man surrendered to a gasping
companion the air tank that would revive him. Captain Nemo set
the example and was foremost in submitting to this strict discipline.
When his time was up, he yielded his equipment to another and reentered
the foul air on board, always calm, unflinching, and uncomplaining.
That day the usual work was accomplished with even greater energy.
Over the whole surface area, only two meters were left to be removed.
Only two meters separated us from the open sea. But the ship's air
tanks were nearly empty. The little air that remained had to be
saved for the workmen. Not an atom for the Nautilus!
When I returned on board, I felt half suffocated. What a night!
I'm unable to depict it. Such sufferings are indescribable.
The next day I was short-winded. Headaches and staggering fits of
dizziness made me reel like a drunk. My companions were experiencing
the same symptoms. Some crewmen were at their last gasp.
That day, the sixth of our imprisonment, Captain Nemo concluded
that picks and mattocks were too slow to deal with the ice layer still
separating us from open water--and he decided to crush this layer.
The man had kept his energy and composure. He had subdued physical
pain with moral strength. He could still think, plan, and act.
At his orders the craft was eased off, in other words, it was
raised from its icy bed by a change in its specific gravity.
When it was afloat, the crew towed it, leading it right above
the immense trench outlined to match the ship's waterline.
Next the ballast tanks filled with water, the boat sank, and was
fitted into its socket.
Just then the whole crew returned on board, and the double outside
door was closed. By this point the Nautilus was resting on a bed
of ice only one meter thick and drilled by bores in a thousand places.
The stopcocks of the ballast tanks were then opened wide, and 100
cubic meters of water rushed in, increasing the Nautilus's weight
by 100,000 kilograms.
286
We waited, we listened, we forgot our sufferings, we hoped once more.
We had staked our salvation on this one last gamble.
Despite the buzzing in my head, I soon could hear vibrations under the
Nautilus's hull. We tilted. The ice cracked with an odd ripping sound,
like paper tearing, and the Nautilus began settling downward.
"We're going through!" Conseil muttered in my ear.
I couldn't answer him. I clutched his hand. I squeezed it
in an involuntary convulsion.
All at once, carried away by its frightful excess load,
the Nautilus sank into the waters like a cannonball, in other words,
dropping as if in a vacuum!
Our full electric power was then put on the pumps,
which instantly began to expel water from the ballast tanks.
After a few minutes we had checked our fall. The pressure gauge
soon indicated an ascending movement. Brought to full speed,
the propeller made the sheet-iron hull tremble down to its rivets,
and we sped northward.
But how long would it take to navigate under the Ice Bank to
the open sea? Another day? I would be dead first!
Half lying on a couch in the library, I was suffocating.
My face was purple, my lips blue, my faculties in abeyance.
I could no longer see or hear. I had lost all sense of time.
My muscles had no power to contract.
I'm unable to estimate the hours that passed in this way.
But I was aware that my death throes had begun. I realized that I
was about to die . . .
Suddenly I regained consciousness. A few whiffs of air had
entered my lungs. Had we risen to the surface of the waves?
Had we cleared the Ice Bank?
No! Ned and Conseil, my two gallant friends, were sacrificing themselves
to save me. A few atoms of air were still left in the depths
of one Rouquayrol device. Instead of breathing it themselves,
they had saved it for me, and while they were suffocating, they poured
life into me drop by drop! I tried to push the device away.
They held my hands, and for a few moments I could breathe luxuriously.
My eyes flew toward the clock. It was eleven in the morning.
It had to be March 28. The Nautilus was traveling at the frightful
speed of forty miles per hour. It was writhing in the waters.
Where was Captain Nemo? Had he perished? Had his companions
died with him?
Just then the pressure gauge indicated we were no more than twenty
feet from the surface. Separating us from the open air was a mere
tract of ice. Could we break through it?
Perhaps! In any event the Nautilus was going to try. In fact,
I could feel it assuming an oblique position, lowering its stern
287
and raising its spur. The admission of additional water was enough
to shift its balance. Then, driven by its powerful propeller,
it attacked this ice field from below like a fearsome battering ram.
It split the barrier little by little, backing up, then putting
on full speed against the punctured tract of ice; and finally,
carried away by its supreme momentum, it lunged through and onto
this frozen surface, crushing the ice beneath its weight.
The hatches were opened--or torn off, if you prefer--and waves
of clean air were admitted into every part of the Nautilus.
288
CHAPTER 17
From Cape Horn to the Amazon
HOW I GOT ONTO the platform I'm unable to say.
Perhaps the Canadian transferred me there. But I could breathe,
I could inhale the life-giving sea air. Next to me my two
companions were getting tipsy on the fresh oxygen particles.
Poor souls who have suffered from long starvation mustn't pounce
heedlessly on the first food given them. We, on the other hand,
didn't have to practice such moderation: we could suck the atoms
from the air by the lungful, and it was the breeze, the breeze itself,
that poured into us this luxurious intoxication!
"Ahhh!" Conseil was putting in. "What fine oxygen! Let master
have no fears about breathing. There's enough for everyone."
As for Ned Land, he didn't say a word, but his wide-open jaws
would have scared off a shark. And what powerful inhalations!
The Canadian "drew" like a furnace going full blast.
Our strength returned promptly, and when I looked around,
I saw that we were alone on the platform. No crewmen.
Not even Captain Nemo. Those strange seamen on the Nautilus
were content with the oxygen circulating inside. Not one of them
had come up to enjoy the open air.
The first words I pronounced were words of appreciation
and gratitude to my two companions. Ned and Conseil had kept
me alive during the final hours of our long death throes.
But no expression of thanks could repay them fully for such devotion.
"Good lord, professor," Ned Land answered me, "don't mention it!
What did we do that's so praiseworthy? Not a thing. It was a
question of simple arithmetic. Your life is worth more than ours.
So we had to save it."
"No, Ned," I replied, "it isn't worth more. Nobody could be better
than a kind and generous man like yourself!"
"All right, all right!" the Canadian repeated in embarrassment.
"And you, my gallant Conseil, you suffered a great deal."
"Not too much, to be candid with master. I was lacking a few
throatfuls of air, but I would have gotten by. Besides, when I saw
master fainting, it left me without the slightest desire to breathe.
It took my breath away, in a manner of . . ."
Confounded by this lapse into banality, Conseil left his sentence hanging.
"My friends," I replied, very moved, "we're bound to each other forever,
and I'm deeply indebted to you--"
"Which I'll take advantage of," the Canadian shot back.
"Eh?" Conseil put in.
"Yes," Ned Land went on. "You can repay your debt by coming with me
289
when I leave this infernal Nautilus."
"By the way," Conseil said, "are we going in a favorable direction?"
"Yes," I replied, "because we're going in the direction of the sun,
and here the sun is due north."
"Sure," Ned Land went on, "but it remains to be seen whether we'll
make for the Atlantic or the Pacific, in other words, whether we'll
end up in well-traveled or deserted seas."
I had no reply to this, and I feared that Captain Nemo wouldn't
take us homeward but rather into that huge ocean washing the shores
of both Asia and America. In this way he would complete his underwater
tour of the world, going back to those seas where the Nautilus
enjoyed the greatest freedom. But if we returned to the Pacific,
far from every populated shore, what would happen to Ned Land's plans?
We would soon settle this important point. The Nautilus
traveled swiftly. Soon we had cleared the Antarctic Circle
plus the promontory of Cape Horn. We were abreast of the tip
of South America by March 31 at seven o'clock in the evening.
By then all our past sufferings were forgotten. The memory
of that imprisonment under the ice faded from our minds.
We had thoughts only of the future. Captain Nemo no longer appeared,
neither in the lounge nor on the platform. The positions reported
each day on the world map were put there by the chief officer,
and they enabled me to determine the Nautilus's exact heading.
Now then, that evening it became obvious, much to my satisfaction,
that we were returning north by the Atlantic route.
I shared the results of my observations with the Canadian and Conseil.
"That's good news," the Canadian replied, "but where's
the Nautilus going?"
"I'm unable to say, Ned."
"After the South Pole, does our captain want to tackle the North Pole,
then go back to the Pacific by the notorious Northwest Passage?"
"I wouldn't double dare him," Conseil replied.
"Oh well," the Canadian said, "we'll give him the slip long before then."
"In any event," Conseil added, "he's a superman, that Captain Nemo,
and we'll never regret having known him."
"Especially once we've left him," Ned Land shot back.
The next day, April 1, when the Nautilus rose to the surface of
the waves a few minutes before noon, we raised land to the west.
It was Tierra del Fuego, the Land of Fire, a name given it
by early navigators after they saw numerous curls of smoke rising
from the natives' huts. This Land of Fire forms a huge cluster
of islands over thirty leagues long and eighty leagues wide,
extending between latitude 53 degrees and 56 degrees south,
and between longitude 67 degrees 50' and 77 degrees 15' west.
Its coastline looked flat, but high mountains rose in the distance.
290
I even thought I glimpsed Mt. Sarmiento, whose elevation is 2,070
meters above sea level: a pyramid-shaped block of shale with a
very sharp summit, which, depending on whether it's clear or veiled
in vapor, "predicts fair weather or foul," as Ned Land told me.
"A first-class barometer, my friend."
"Yes, sir, a natural barometer that didn't let me down when I
navigated the narrows of the Strait of Magellan."
Just then its peak appeared before us, standing out distinctly
against the background of the skies. This forecast fair weather.
And so it proved.
Going back under the waters, the Nautilus drew near the coast,
cruising along it for only a few miles. Through the lounge
windows I could see long creepers and gigantic fucus plants,
bulb-bearing seaweed of which the open sea at the pole had revealed
a few specimens; with their smooth, viscous filaments, they measured
as much as 300 meters long; genuine cables more than an inch thick
and very tough, they're often used as mooring lines for ships.
Another weed, known by the name velp and boasting four-foot leaves,
was crammed into the coral concretions and carpeted the ocean floor.
It served as both nest and nourishment for myriads of crustaceans
and mollusks, for crabs and cuttlefish. Here seals and otters could
indulge in a sumptuous meal, mixing meat from fish with vegetables
from the sea, like the English with their Irish stews.
The Nautilus passed over these lush, luxuriant depths with
tremendous speed. Near evening it approached the Falkland Islands,
whose rugged summits I recognized the next day. The sea was of
moderate depth. So not without good reason, I assumed that these
two islands, plus the many islets surrounding them, used to be part
of the Magellan coastline. The Falkland Islands were probably
discovered by the famous navigator John Davis, who gave them the name
Davis Southern Islands. Later Sir Richard Hawkins called them
the Maidenland, after the Blessed Virgin. Subsequently, at the beginning
of the 18th century, they were named the Malouines by fishermen
from Saint-Malo in Brittany, then finally dubbed the Falklands
by the English, to whom they belong today.
In these waterways our nets brought up fine samples of algae,
in particular certain fucus plants whose roots were laden with
the world's best mussels. Geese and duck alighted by the dozens
on the platform and soon took their places in the ship's pantry.
As for fish, I specifically observed some bony fish belonging
to the goby genus, especially some gudgeon two decimeters long,
sprinkled with whitish and yellow spots.
I likewise marveled at the numerous medusas, including the most beautiful
of their breed, the compass jellyfish, unique to the Falkland seas.
Some of these jellyfish were shaped like very smooth,
semispheric parasols with russet stripes and fringes of twelve
neat festoons. Others looked like upside-down baskets from
which wide leaves and long red twigs were gracefully trailing.
They swam with quiverings of their four leaflike arms,
letting the opulent tresses of their tentacles dangle in the drift.
I wanted to preserve a few specimens of these delicate zoophytes,
but they were merely clouds, shadows, illusions, melting and evaporating
outside their native element.
291
When the last tips of the Falkland Islands had disappeared below
the horizon, the Nautilus submerged to a depth between twenty
and twenty-five meters and went along the South American coast.
Captain Nemo didn't put in an appearance.
We didn't leave these Patagonian waterways until April 3,
sometimes cruising under the ocean, sometimes on its surface.
The Nautilus passed the wide estuary formed by the mouth of the Rio
de la Plata, and on April 4 we lay abreast of Uruguay, albeit fifty
miles out. Keeping to its northerly heading, it followed the long
windings of South America. By then we had fared 16,000 leagues
since coming on board in the seas of Japan.
Near eleven o'clock in the morning, we cut the Tropic of Capricorn
on the 37th meridian, passing well out from Cape Frio. Much to
Ned Land's displeasure, Captain Nemo had no liking for the neighborhood
of Brazil's populous shores, because he shot by with dizzying speed.
Not even the swiftest fish or birds could keep up with us, and the
natural curiosities in these seas completely eluded our observation.
This speed was maintained for several days, and on the evening
of April 9, we raised South America's easternmost tip,
Cape São Roque. But then the Nautilus veered away again and went
looking for the lowest depths of an underwater valley gouged between
this cape and Sierra Leone on the coast of Africa. Abreast of
the West Indies, this valley forks into two arms, and to
the north it ends in an enormous depression 9,000 meters deep.
From this locality to the Lesser Antilles, the ocean's geologic
profile features a steeply cut cliff six kilometers high, and abreast
of the Cape Verde Islands, there's another wall just as imposing;
together these two barricades confine the whole submerged continent
of Atlantis. The floor of this immense valley is made picturesque
by mountains that furnish these underwater depths with scenic views.
This description is based mostly on certain hand-drawn charts kept
in the Nautilus's library, charts obviously rendered by Captain Nemo
himself from his own personal observations.
For two days we visited these deep and deserted waters by means
of our slanting fins. The Nautilus would do long, diagonal dives
that took us to every level. But on April 11 it rose suddenly,
and the shore reappeared at the mouth of the Amazon River,
a huge estuary whose outflow is so considerable, it desalts the sea
over an area of several leagues.
We cut the Equator. Twenty miles to the west lay Guiana, French
territory where we could easily have taken refuge.
But the wind was blowing a strong gust, and the furious
billows would not allow us to face them in a mere skiff.
No doubt Ned Land understood this because he said nothing to me.
For my part, I made no allusion to his escape plans because I didn't
want to push him into an attempt that was certain to misfire.
I was readily compensated for this delay by fascinating research.
During those two days of April 11-12, the Nautilus didn't leave
the surface of the sea, and its trawl brought up a simply miraculous
catch of zoophytes, fish, and reptiles.
Some zoophytes were dredged up by the chain of our trawl. Most were
lovely sea anemone belonging to the family Actinidia, including among
292
other species, the Phyctalis protexta, native to this part of the ocean:
a small cylindrical trunk adorned with vertical lines, mottled with
red spots, and crowned by a wondrous blossoming of tentacles.
As for mollusks, they consisted of exhibits I had already observed:
turret snails, olive shells of the "tent olive" species with neatly
intersecting lines and russet spots standing out sharply against
a flesh-colored background, fanciful spider conchs that looked
like petrified scorpions, transparent glass snails, argonauts,
some highly edible cuttlefish, and certain species of squid
that the naturalists of antiquity classified with the flying fish,
which are used chiefly as bait for catching cod.
As for the fish in these waterways, I noted various species that I
hadn't yet had the opportunity to study. Among cartilaginous fish:
some brook lamprey, a type of eel fifteen inches long, head greenish,
fins violet, back bluish gray, belly a silvery brown strewn with
bright spots, iris of the eye encircled in gold, unusual animals
that the Amazon's current must have swept out to sea because their
natural habitat is fresh water; sting rays, the snout pointed,
the tail long, slender, and armed with an extensive jagged sting;
small one-meter sharks with gray and whitish hides, their teeth
arranged in several backward-curving rows, fish commonly known
by the name carpet shark; batfish, a sort of reddish isosceles
triangle half a meter long, whose pectoral fins are attached
by fleshy extensions that make these fish look like bats,
although an appendage made of horn, located near the nostrils,
earns them the nickname of sea unicorns; lastly, a couple species
of triggerfish, the cucuyo whose stippled flanks glitter with a
sparkling gold color, and the bright purple leatherjacket whose
hues glisten like a pigeon's throat.
I'll finish up this catalog, a little dry but quite accurate,
with the series of bony fish I observed: eels belonging to the genus
Apteronotus whose snow-white snout is very blunt, the body painted
a handsome black and armed with a very long, slender, fleshy whip;
long sardines from the genus Odontognathus, like three-decimeter pike,
shining with a bright silver glow; Guaranian mackerel furnished with two
anal fins; black-tinted rudderfish that you catch by using torches,
fish measuring two meters and boasting white, firm, plump meat that,
when fresh, tastes like eel, when dried, like smoked salmon;
semired wrasse sporting scales only at the bases of their dorsal
and anal fins; grunts on which gold and silver mingle their luster
with that of ruby and topaz; yellow-tailed gilthead whose flesh
is extremely dainty and whose phosphorescent properties give
them away in the midst of the waters; porgies tinted orange,
with slender tongues; croakers with gold caudal fins; black surgeonfish;
four-eyed fish from Surinam, etc.
This "et cetera" won't keep me from mentioning one more fish
that Conseil, with good reason, will long remember.
One of our nets had hauled up a type of very flat ray that weighed
some twenty kilograms; with its tail cut off, it would have formed
a perfect disk. It was white underneath and reddish on top, with big
round spots of deep blue encircled in black, its hide quite smooth
and ending in a double-lobed fin. Laid out on the platform, it kept
struggling with convulsive movements, trying to turn over, making such
efforts that its final lunge was about to flip it into the sea.
But Conseil, being very possessive of his fish, rushed at it,
and before I could stop him, he seized it with both hands.
293
Instantly there he was, thrown on his back, legs in the air,
his body half paralyzed, and yelling:
"Oh, sir, sir! Will you help me!"
For once in his life, the poor lad didn't address me "in
the third person."
The Canadian and I sat him up; we massaged his contracted arms,
and when he regained his five senses, that eternal classifier
mumbled in a broken voice:
"Class of cartilaginous fish, order Chondropterygia with fixed gills,
suborder Selacia, family Rajiiforma, genus electric ray."
"Yes, my friend," I answered, "it was an electric ray that put you
in this deplorable state."
"Oh, master can trust me on this," Conseil shot back.
"I'll be revenged on that animal!"
"How?"
"I'll eat it."
Which he did that same evening, but strictly as retaliation.
Because, frankly, it tasted like leather.
Poor Conseil had assaulted an electric ray of the most dangerous species,
the cumana. Living in a conducting medium such as water, this bizarre
animal can electrocute other fish from several meters away,
so great is the power of its electric organ, an organ whose two chief
surfaces measure at least twenty-seven square feet.
During the course of the next day, April 12, the Nautilus drew near the
coast of Dutch Guiana, by the mouth of the Maroni River. There several
groups of sea cows were living in family units. These were manatees,
which belong to the order Sirenia, like the dugong and Steller's sea cow.
Harmless and unaggressive, these fine animals were six to seven
meters long and must have weighed at least 4,000 kilograms each.
I told Ned Land and Conseil that farseeing nature had given these
mammals a major role to play. In essence, manatees, like seals,
are designed to graze the underwater prairies, destroying the clusters
of weeds that obstruct the mouths of tropical rivers.
"And do you know," I added, "what happened since man has
almost completely wiped out these beneficial races?
Rotting weeds have poisoned the air, and this poisoned air causes
the yellow fever that devastates these wonderful countries.
This toxic vegetation has increased beneath the seas of the Torrid Zone,
so the disease spreads unchecked from the mouth of the Rio de la
Plata to Florida!"
And if Professor Toussenel is correct, this plague is nothing
compared to the scourge that will strike our descendants
once the seas are depopulated of whales and seals. By then,
crowded with jellyfish, squid, and other devilfish, the oceans
will have become huge centers of infection, because their waves
will no longer possess "these huge stomachs that God has entrusted
294
with scouring the surface of the sea."
Meanwhile, without scorning these theories, the Nautilus's crew captured
half a dozen manatees. In essence, it was an issue of stocking
the larder with excellent red meat, even better than beef or veal.
Their hunting was not a fascinating sport. The manatees let
themselves be struck down without offering any resistance.
Several thousand kilos of meat were hauled below, to be dried and stored.
The same day an odd fishing practice further increased
the Nautilus's stores, so full of game were these seas.
Our trawl brought up in its meshes a number of fish whose heads were
topped by little oval slabs with fleshy edges. These were suckerfish
from the third family of the subbrachian Malacopterygia. These flat
disks on their heads consist of crosswise plates of movable cartilage,
between which the animals can create a vacuum, enabling them to stick
to objects like suction cups.
The remoras I had observed in the Mediterranean were related to
this species. But the creature at issue here was an Echeneis osteochara,
unique to this sea. Right after catching them, our seamen dropped
them in buckets of water.
Its fishing finished, the Nautilus drew nearer to the coast.
In this locality a number of sea turtles were sleeping on the surface
of the waves. It would have been difficult to capture these
valuable reptiles, because they wake up at the slightest sound,
and their solid carapaces are harpoon-proof. But our suckerfish would
effect their capture with extraordinary certainty and precision.
In truth, this animal is a living fishhook, promising wealth
and happiness to the greenest fisherman in the business.
The Nautilus's men attached to each fish's tail a ring that was big
enough not to hamper its movements, and to this ring a long rope
whose other end was moored on board.
Thrown into the sea, the suckerfish immediately began to play their roles,
going and fastening themselves onto the breastplates of the turtles.
Their tenacity was so great, they would rip apart rather than let go.
They were hauled in, still sticking to the turtles that came
aboard with them.
In this way we caught several loggerheads, reptiles a meter
wide and weighing 200 kilos. They're extremely valuable
because of their carapaces, which are covered with big slabs
of horn, thin, brown, transparent, with white and yellow markings.
Besides, they were excellent from an edible viewpoint, with an
exquisite flavor comparable to the green turtle.
This fishing ended our stay in the waterways of the Amazon,
and that evening the Nautilus took to the high seas once more.
295
CHAPTER 18
The Devilfish
FOR SOME DAYS the Nautilus kept veering away from the American coast.
It obviously didn't want to frequent the waves of the Gulf of Mexico
or the Caribbean Sea. Yet there was no shortage of water under
its keel, since the average depth of these seas is 1,800 meters;
but these waterways, strewn with islands and plowed by steamers,
probably didn't agree with Captain Nemo.
On April 16 we raised Martinique and Guadalupe from a distance of
about thirty miles. For one instant I could see their lofty peaks.
The Canadian was quite disheartened, having counted on putting
his plans into execution in the gulf, either by reaching shore
or by pulling alongside one of the many boats plying a coastal trade
from one island to another. An escape attempt would have been
quite feasible, assuming Ned Land managed to seize the skiff without
the captain's knowledge. But in midocean it was unthinkable.
The Canadian, Conseil, and I had a pretty long conversation on
this subject. For six months we had been prisoners aboard the Nautilus.
We had fared 17,000 leagues, and as Ned Land put it, there was no
end in sight. So he made me a proposition I hadn't anticipated.
We were to ask Captain Nemo this question straight out:
did the captain mean to keep us on board his vessel permanently?
This measure was distasteful to me. To my mind it would lead nowhere.
We could hope for nothing from the Nautilus's commander
but could depend only on ourselves. Besides, for some time
now the man had been gloomier, more withdrawn, less sociable.
He seemed to be avoiding me. I encountered him only at rare intervals.
He used to take pleasure in explaining the underwater wonders to me;
now he left me to my research and no longer entered the lounge.
What changes had come over him? From what cause? I had no reason
to blame myself. Was our presence on board perhaps a burden to him?
Even so, I cherished no hopes that the man would set us free.
So I begged Ned to let me think about it before taking action. If this
measure proved fruitless, it could arouse the captain's suspicions, make
our circumstances even more arduous, and jeopardize the Canadian's plans.
I might add that I could hardly use our state of health as an argument.
Except for that grueling ordeal under the Ice Bank at the South Pole,
we had never felt better, neither Ned, Conseil, nor I. The
nutritious food, life-giving air, regular routine, and uniform
temperature kept illness at bay; and for a man who didn't miss his
past existence on land, for a Captain Nemo who was at home here,
who went where he wished, who took paths mysterious to others if not
himself in attaining his ends, I could understand such a life.
But we ourselves hadn't severed all ties with humanity. For my part,
I didn't want my new and unusual research to be buried with my bones.
I had now earned the right to pen the definitive book on the sea,
and sooner or later I wanted that book to see the light of day.
There once more, through the panels opening into these Caribbean
waters ten meters below the surface of the waves, I found
so many fascinating exhibits to describe in my daily notes!
296
Among other zoophytes there were Portuguese men-of-war known by the name
Physalia pelagica, like big, oblong bladders with a pearly sheen,
spreading their membranes to the wind, letting their blue tentacles
drift like silken threads; to the eye delightful jellyfish,
to the touch actual nettles that ooze a corrosive liquid.
Among the articulates there were annelid worms one and a half
meters long, furnished with a pink proboscis, equipped with 1,700
organs of locomotion, snaking through the waters, and as they went,
throwing off every gleam in the solar spectrum. From the fish
branch there were manta rays, enormous cartilaginous fish ten
feet long and weighing 600 pounds, their pectoral fin triangular,
their midback slightly arched, their eyes attached to the edges
of the face at the front of the head; they floated like wreckage from
a ship, sometimes fastening onto our windows like opaque shutters.
There were American triggerfish for which nature has ground only black
and white pigments, feather-shaped gobies that were long and plump
with yellow fins and jutting jaws, sixteen-decimeter mackerel
with short, sharp teeth, covered with small scales, and related
to the albacore species. Next came swarms of red mullet corseted
in gold stripes from head to tail, their shining fins all aquiver,
genuine masterpieces of jewelry, formerly sacred to the goddess Diana,
much in demand by rich Romans, and about which the old saying goes:
"He who catches them doesn't eat them!" Finally, adorned with
emerald ribbons and dressed in velvet and silk, golden angelfish
passed before our eyes like courtiers in the paintings of Veronese;
spurred gilthead stole by with their swift thoracic fins; thread herring
fifteen inches long were wrapped in their phosphorescent glimmers;
gray mullet thrashed the sea with their big fleshy tails;
red salmon seemed to mow the waves with their slicing pectorals;
and silver moonfish, worthy of their name, rose on the horizon
of the waters like the whitish reflections of many moons.
How many other marvelous new specimens I still could have observed if,
little by little, the Nautilus hadn't settled to the lower strata!
Its slanting fins drew it to depths of 2,000 and 3,500 meters.
There animal life was represented by nothing more than sea lilies,
starfish, delightful crinoids with bell-shaped heads like little
chalices on straight stems, top-shell snails, blood-red tooth shells,
and fissurella snails, a large species of coastal mollusk.
By April 20 we had risen to an average level of 1,500 meters.
The nearest land was the island group of the Bahamas, scattered
like a batch of cobblestones over the surface of the water.
There high underwater cliffs reared up, straight walls made of craggy
chunks arranged like big stone foundations, among which there
gaped black caves so deep our electric rays couldn't light them
to the far ends.
These rocks were hung with huge weeds, immense sea tangle, gigantic fucus--
a genuine trellis of water plants fit for a world of giants.
In discussing these colossal plants, Conseil, Ned, and I were naturally
led into mentioning the sea's gigantic animals. The former were
obviously meant to feed the latter. However, through the windows
of our almost motionless Nautilus, I could see nothing among these long
filaments other than the chief articulates of the division Brachyura:
long-legged spider crabs, violet crabs, and sponge crabs unique
to the waters of the Caribbean.
It was about eleven o'clock when Ned Land drew my attention to a
297
fearsome commotion out in this huge seaweed.
"Well," I said, "these are real devilfish caverns, and I wouldn't
be surprised to see some of those monsters hereabouts."
"What!" Conseil put in. "Squid, ordinary squid from
the class Cephalopoda?"
"No," I said, "devilfish of large dimensions. But friend Land
is no doubt mistaken, because I don't see a thing."
"That's regrettable," Conseil answered. "I'd like to come face
to face with one of those devilfish I've heard so much about,
which can drag ships down into the depths. Those beasts go
by the name of krake--"
"Fake is more like it," the Canadian replied sarcastically.
"Krakens!" Conseil shot back, finishing his word without wincing
at his companion's witticism.
"Nobody will ever make me believe," Ned Land said, "that
such animals exist."
"Why not?" Conseil replied. "We sincerely believed
in master's narwhale."
"We were wrong, Conseil."
"No doubt, but there are others with no doubts who believe
to this day!"
"Probably, Conseil. But as for me, I'm bound and determined not
to accept the existence of any such monster till I've dissected it
with my own two hands."
"Yet," Conseil asked me, "doesn't master believe in gigantic devilfish?"
"Yikes! Who in Hades ever believed in them?" the Canadian exclaimed.
"Many people, Ned my friend," I said.
"No fishermen. Scientists maybe!"
"Pardon me, Ned. Fishermen and scientists!"
"Why, I to whom you speak," Conseil said with the world's
straightest face, "I recall perfectly seeing a large boat dragged
under the waves by the arms of a cephalopod."
"You saw that?" the Canadian asked.
"Yes, Ned."
"With your own two eyes?"
"With my own two eyes."
"Where, may I ask?"
298
"In Saint-Malo," Conseil returned unflappably.
"In the harbor?" Ned Land said sarcastically.
"No, in a church," Conseil replied.
"In a church!" the Canadian exclaimed.
"Yes, Ned my friend. It had a picture that portrayed the
devilfish in question."
"Oh good!" Ned Land exclaimed with a burst of laughter.
"Mr. Conseil put one over on me!"
"Actually he's right," I said. "I've heard about that picture.
But the subject it portrays is taken from a legend, and you know
how to rate legends in matters of natural history! Besides, when it's
an issue of monsters, the human imagination always tends to run wild.
People not only claimed these devilfish could drag ships under,
but a certain Olaus Magnus tells of a cephalopod a mile long that looked
more like an island than an animal. There's also the story of how
the Bishop of Trondheim set up an altar one day on an immense rock.
After he finished saying mass, this rock started moving and went
back into the sea. The rock was a devilfish."
"And that's everything we know?" the Canadian asked.
"No," I replied, "another bishop, Pontoppidan of Bergen,
also tells of a devilfish so large a whole cavalry regiment could
maneuver on it."
"They sure did go on, those oldtime bishops!" Ned Land said.
"Finally, the naturalists of antiquity mention some monsters
with mouths as big as a gulf, which were too huge to get through
the Strait of Gibraltar."
"Good work, men!" the Canadian put in.
"But in all these stories, is there any truth?" Conseil asked.
"None at all, my friends, at least in those that go beyond the bounds
of credibility and fly off into fable or legend. Yet for the imaginings
of these storytellers there had to be, if not a cause, at least
an excuse. It can't be denied that some species of squid and other
devilfish are quite large, though still smaller than cetaceans.
Aristotle put the dimensions of one squid at five cubits, or 3.1 meters.
Our fishermen frequently see specimens over 1.8 meters long.
The museums in Trieste and Montpellier have preserved some devilfish
carcasses measuring two meters. Besides, according to the calculations
of naturalists, one of these animals only six feet long would
have tentacles as long as twenty-seven. Which is enough to make
a fearsome monster."
"Does anybody fish for 'em nowadays?" the Canadian asked.
"If they don't fish for them, sailors at least sight them.
A friend of mine, Captain Paul Bos of Le Havre, has often sworn
to me that he encountered one of these monsters of colossal size
in the seas of the East Indies. But the most astonishing event,
299
which proves that these gigantic animals undeniably exist,
took place a few years ago in 1861."
"What event was that?" Ned Land asked.
"Just this. In 1861, to the northeast of Tenerife and fairly
near the latitude where we are right now, the crew of the gunboat
Alecto spotted a monstrous squid swimming in their waters.
Commander Bouguer approached the animal and attacked it with blows
from harpoons and blasts from rifles, but without much success
because bullets and harpoons crossed its soft flesh as if it
were semiliquid jelly. After several fruitless attempts,
the crew managed to slip a noose around the mollusk's body.
This noose slid as far as the caudal fins and came to a halt.
Then they tried to haul the monster on board, but its weight
was so considerable that when they tugged on the rope, the animal
parted company with its tail; and deprived of this adornment,
it disappeared beneath the waters."
"Finally, an actual event," Ned Land said.
"An indisputable event, my gallant Ned. Accordingly, people have
proposed naming this devilfish Bouguer's Squid."
"And how long was it?" the Canadian asked.
"Didn't it measure about six meters?" said Conseil, who was stationed
at the window and examining anew the crevices in the cliff.
"Precisely," I replied.
"Wasn't its head," Conseil went on, "crowned by eight tentacles
that quivered in the water like a nest of snakes?"
"Precisely."
"Weren't its eyes prominently placed and considerably enlarged?"
"Yes, Conseil."
"And wasn't its mouth a real parrot's beak but of fearsome size?"
"Correct, Conseil."
"Well, with all due respect to master," Conseil replied serenely,
"if this isn't Bouguer's Squid, it's at least one of his close relatives!"
I stared at Conseil. Ned Land rushed to the window.
"What an awful animal!" he exclaimed.
I stared in my turn and couldn't keep back a movement of revulsion.
Before my eyes there quivered a horrible monster worthy of a place
among the most farfetched teratological legends.
It was a squid of colossal dimensions, fully eight meters long.
It was traveling backward with tremendous speed in the same direction
as the Nautilus. It gazed with enormous, staring eyes that were tinted
sea green. Its eight arms (or more accurately, feet) were rooted
in its head, which has earned these animals the name cephalopod;
300
its arms stretched a distance twice the length of its body and
were writhing like the serpentine hair of the Furies. You could
plainly see its 250 suckers, arranged over the inner sides
of its tentacles and shaped like semispheric capsules.
Sometimes these suckers fastened onto the lounge window by creating
vacuums against it. The monster's mouth--a beak made of horn
and shaped like that of a parrot--opened and closed vertically.
Its tongue, also of horn substance and armed with several rows
of sharp teeth, would flicker out from between these genuine shears.
What a freak of nature! A bird's beak on a mollusk!
Its body was spindle-shaped and swollen in the middle,
a fleshy mass that must have weighed 20,000 to 25,000 kilograms.
Its unstable color would change with tremendous speed as the animal
grew irritated, passing successively from bluish gray to reddish brown.
What was irritating this mollusk? No doubt the presence
of the Nautilus, even more fearsome than itself, and which it
couldn't grip with its mandibles or the suckers on its arms.
And yet what monsters these devilfish are, what vitality our Creator
has given them, what vigor in their movements, thanks to their owning
a triple heart!
Sheer chance had placed us in the presence of this squid, and I
didn't want to lose this opportunity to meticulously study such
a cephalopod specimen. I overcame the horror that its appearance
inspired in me, picked up a pencil, and began to sketch it.
"Perhaps this is the same as the Alecto's," Conseil said.
"Can't be," the Canadian replied, "because this one's complete
while the other one lost its tail!"
"That doesn't necessarily follow," I said. "The arms and tails
of these animals grow back through regeneration, and in seven years
the tail on Bouguer's Squid has surely had time to sprout again."
"Anyhow," Ned shot back, "if it isn't this fellow, maybe it's
one of those!"
Indeed, other devilfish had appeared at the starboard window.
I counted seven of them. They provided the Nautilus with an escort,
and I could hear their beaks gnashing on the sheet-iron hull.
We couldn't have asked for a more devoted following.
I continued sketching. These monsters kept pace in our waters
with such precision, they seemed to be standing still, and I
could have traced their outlines in miniature on the window.
But we were moving at a moderate speed.
All at once the Nautilus stopped. A jolt made it tremble through
its entire framework.
"Did we strike bottom?" I asked.
"In any event we're already clear," the Canadian replied,
"because we're afloat."
The Nautilus was certainly afloat, but it was no longer in motion.
The blades of its propeller weren't churning the waves. A minute passed.
Followed by his chief officer, Captain Nemo entered the lounge.
301
I hadn't seen him for a good while. He looked gloomy to me.
Without speaking to us, without even seeing us perhaps, he went
to the panel, stared at the devilfish, and said a few words
to his chief officer.
The latter went out. Soon the panels closed. The ceiling lit up.
I went over to the captain.
"An unusual assortment of devilfish," I told him, as carefree
as a collector in front of an aquarium.
"Correct, Mr. Naturalist," he answered me, "and we're going to fight
them at close quarters."
I gaped at the captain. I thought my hearing had gone bad.
"At close quarters?" I repeated.
"Yes, sir. Our propeller is jammed. I think the horn-covered
mandibles of one of these squid are entangled in the blades.
That's why we aren't moving."
"And what are you going to do?"
"Rise to the surface and slaughter the vermin."
"A difficult undertaking."
"Correct. Our electric bullets are ineffective against such
soft flesh, where they don't meet enough resistance to go off.
But we'll attack the beasts with axes."
"And harpoons, sir," the Canadian said, "if you don't turn
down my help."
"I accept it, Mr. Land."
"We'll go with you," I said. And we followed Captain Nemo,
heading to the central companionway.
There some ten men were standing by for the assault,
armed with boarding axes. Conseil and I picked up two more axes.
Ned Land seized a harpoon.
By then the Nautilus had returned to the surface of the waves.
Stationed on the top steps, one of the seamen undid the bolts
of the hatch. But he had scarcely unscrewed the nuts when the hatch
flew up with tremendous violence, obviously pulled open by the suckers
on a devilfish's arm.
Instantly one of those long arms glided like a snake into the opening,
and twenty others were quivering above. With a sweep of the ax,
Captain Nemo chopped off this fearsome tentacle, which slid writhing
down the steps.
Just as we were crowding each other to reach the platform, two more arms
lashed the air, swooped on the seaman stationed in front of Captain Nemo,
302
and carried the fellow away with irresistible violence.
Captain Nemo gave a shout and leaped outside. We rushed after him.
What a scene! Seized by the tentacle and glued to its suckers,
the unfortunate man was swinging in the air at the mercy
of this enormous appendage. He gasped, he choked, he yelled:
"Help! Help!" These words, pronounced in French, left me deeply stunned!
So I had a fellow countryman on board, perhaps several!
I'll hear his harrowing plea the rest of my life!
The poor fellow was done for. Who could tear him from such
a powerful grip? Even so, Captain Nemo rushed at the devilfish
and with a sweep of the ax hewed one more of its arms.
His chief officer struggled furiously with other monsters crawling
up the Nautilus's sides. The crew battled with flailing axes.
The Canadian, Conseil, and I sank our weapons into these fleshy masses.
An intense, musky odor filled the air. It was horrible.
For an instant I thought the poor man entwined by the devilfish
might be torn loose from its powerful suction. Seven arms out of
eight had been chopped off. Brandishing its victim like a feather,
one lone tentacle was writhing in the air. But just as Captain Nemo
and his chief officer rushed at it, the animal shot off a spout
of blackish liquid, secreted by a pouch located in its abdomen.
It blinded us. When this cloud had dispersed, the squid was gone,
and so was my poor fellow countryman!
What rage then drove us against these monsters! We lost all self-control.
Ten or twelve devilfish had overrun the Nautilus's platform and sides.
We piled helter-skelter into the thick of these sawed-off snakes,
which darted over the platform amid waves of blood and sepia ink.
It seemed as if these viscous tentacles grew back like the many heads
of Hydra. At every thrust Ned Land's harpoon would plunge into
a squid's sea-green eye and burst it. But my daring companion was
suddenly toppled by the tentacles of a monster he could not avoid.
Oh, my heart nearly exploded with excitement and horror!
The squid's fearsome beak was wide open over Ned Land. The poor
man was about to be cut in half. I ran to his rescue.
But Captain Nemo got there first. His ax disappeared between the two
enormous mandibles, and the Canadian, miraculously saved, stood and
plunged his harpoon all the way into the devilfish's triple heart.
"Tit for tat," Captain Nemo told the Canadian. "I owed it to myself!"
Ned bowed without answering him.
This struggle had lasted a quarter of an hour. Defeated, mutilated,
battered to death, the monsters finally yielded to us and disappeared
beneath the waves.
Red with blood, motionless by the beacon, Captain Nemo stared at
the sea that had swallowed one of his companions, and large tears
streamed from his eyes.
303
CHAPTER 19
The Gulf Stream
THIS DREADFUL SCENE on April 20 none of us will ever be able to forget.
I wrote it up in a state of intense excitement. Later I reviewed
my narrative. I read it to Conseil and the Canadian. They found it
accurate in detail but deficient in impact. To convey such sights,
it would take the pen of our most famous poet, Victor Hugo,
author of The Toilers of the Sea.
As I said, Captain Nemo wept while staring at the waves.
His grief was immense. This was the second companion he had
lost since we had come aboard. And what a way to die!
Smashed, strangled, crushed by the fearsome arms of a devilfish,
ground between its iron mandibles, this friend would never rest
with his companions in the placid waters of their coral cemetery!
As for me, what had harrowed my heart in the thick of this
struggle was the despairing yell given by this unfortunate man.
Forgetting his regulation language, this poor Frenchman had reverted
to speaking his own mother tongue to fling out one supreme plea!
Among the Nautilus's crew, allied body and soul with Captain Nemo and
likewise fleeing from human contact, I had found a fellow countryman!
Was he the only representative of France in this mysterious alliance,
obviously made up of individuals from different nationalities?
This was just one more of those insoluble problems that kept welling
up in my mind!
Captain Nemo reentered his stateroom, and I saw no more of him
for a good while. But how sad, despairing, and irresolute he must
have felt, to judge from this ship whose soul he was, which reflected
his every mood! The Nautilus no longer kept to a fixed heading.
It drifted back and forth, riding with the waves like a corpse.
Its propeller had been disentangled but was barely put to use.
It was navigating at random. It couldn't tear itself away from
the setting of this last struggle, from this sea that had devoured
one of its own!
Ten days went by in this way. It was only on May 1 that the Nautilus
openly resumed its northbound course, after raising the Bahamas at
the mouth of Old Bahama Channel. We then went with the current of the
sea's greatest river, which has its own banks, fish, and temperature.
I mean the Gulf Stream.
It is indeed a river that runs independently through the middle
of the Atlantic, its waters never mixing with the ocean's waters.
It's a salty river, saltier than the sea surrounding it.
Its average depth is 3,000 feet, its average width sixty miles.
In certain localities its current moves at a speed of four kilometers
per hour. The unchanging volume of its waters is greater than
that of all the world's rivers combined.
As discovered by Commander Maury, the true source of the Gulf Stream,
its starting point, if you prefer, is located in the Bay
of Biscay. There its waters, still weak in temperature and color,
begin to form. It goes down south, skirts equatorial Africa,
warms its waves in the rays of the Torrid Zone, crosses the Atlantic,
reaches Cape São Roque on the coast of Brazil, and forks into
304
two branches, one going to the Caribbean Sea for further saturation
with heat particles. Then, entrusted with restoring the balance
between hot and cold temperatures and with mixing tropical and
northern waters, the Gulf Stream begins to play its stabilizing role.
Attaining a white heat in the Gulf of Mexico, it heads north up
the American coast, advances as far as Newfoundland, swerves away
under the thrust of a cold current from the Davis Strait,
and resumes its ocean course by going along a great circle
of the earth on a rhumb line; it then divides into two arms near
the 43rd parallel; one, helped by the northeast trade winds,
returns to the Bay of Biscay and the Azores; the other washes the shores
of Ireland and Norway with lukewarm water, goes beyond Spitzbergen,
where its temperature falls to 4 degrees centigrade, and fashions
the open sea at the pole.
It was on this oceanic river that the Nautilus was then navigating.
Leaving Old Bahama Channel, which is fourteen leagues wide by 350 meters
deep, the Gulf Stream moves at the rate of eight kilometers per hour.
Its speed steadily decreases as it advances northward, and we must
pray that this steadiness continues, because, as experts agree,
if its speed and direction were to change, the climates of Europe
would undergo disturbances whose consequences are incalculable.
Near noon I was on the platform with Conseil. I shared with him
the relevant details on the Gulf Stream. When my explanation was over,
I invited him to dip his hands into its current.
Conseil did so, and he was quite astonished to experience no sensation
of either hot or cold.
"That comes," I told him, "from the water temperature of the Gulf Stream,
which, as it leaves the Gulf of Mexico, is barely different from
your blood temperature. This Gulf Stream is a huge heat generator
that enables the coasts of Europe to be decked in eternal greenery.
And if Commander Maury is correct, were one to harness the full
warmth of this current, it would supply enough heat to keep molten
a river of iron solder as big as the Amazon or the Missouri."
Just then the Gulf Stream's speed was 2.25 meters per second.
So distinct is its current from the surrounding sea, its confined
waters stand out against the ocean and operate on a different level
from the colder waters. Murky as well, and very rich in saline material,
their pure indigo contrasts with the green waves surrounding them.
Moreover, their line of demarcation is so clear that abreast of
the Carolinas, the Nautilus's spur cut the waves of the Gulf Stream
while its propeller was still churning those belonging to the ocean.
This current swept along with it a whole host of moving creatures.
Argonauts, so common in the Mediterranean, voyaged here in schools
of large numbers. Among cartilaginous fish, the most remarkable were
rays whose ultra slender tails made up nearly a third of the body,
which was shaped like a huge diamond twenty-five feet long;
then little one-meter sharks, the head large, the snout short
and rounded, the teeth sharp and arranged in several rows,
the body seemingly covered with scales.
Among bony fish, I noted grizzled wrasse unique to these seas,
deep-water gilthead whose iris has a fiery gleam, one-meter croakers
whose large mouths bristle with small teeth and which let out
thin cries, black rudderfish like those I've already discussed,
305
blue dorados accented with gold and silver, rainbow-hued parrotfish
that can rival the loveliest tropical birds in coloring,
banded blennies with triangular heads, bluish flounder without scales,
toadfish covered with a crosswise yellow band in the shape of a Greek t,
swarms of little freckled gobies stippled with brown spots,
lungfish with silver heads and yellow tails, various specimens
of salmon, mullet with slim figures and a softly glowing radiance
that Lacépède dedicated to the memory of his wife, and finally
the American cavalla, a handsome fish decorated by every honorary order,
bedizened with their every ribbon, frequenting the shores of this
great nation where ribbons and orders are held in such low esteem.
I might add that during the night, the Gulf Stream's phosphorescent
waters rivaled the electric glow of our beacon, especially in
the stormy weather that frequently threatened us.
On May 8, while abreast of North Carolina, we were across from
Cape Hatteras once more. There the Gulf Stream is seventy-five
miles wide and 210 meters deep. The Nautilus continued to wander
at random. Seemingly, all supervision had been jettisoned.
Under these conditions I admit that we could easily have gotten away.
In fact, the populous shores offered ready refuge everywhere.
The sea was plowed continuously by the many steamers providing
service between the Gulf of Mexico and New York or Boston,
and it was crossed night and day by little schooners engaged
in coastal trade over various points on the American shore.
We could hope to be picked up. So it was a promising opportunity,
despite the thirty miles that separated the Nautilus from
these Union coasts.
But one distressing circumstance totally thwarted the Canadian's plans.
The weather was thoroughly foul. We were approaching waterways
where storms are commonplace, the very homeland of tornadoes
and cyclones specifically engendered by the Gulf Stream's current.
To face a frequently raging sea in a frail skiff was a race
to certain disaster. Ned Land conceded this himself.
So he champed at the bit, in the grip of an intense homesickness
that could be cured only by our escape.
"Sir," he told me that day, "it's got to stop. I want to get to
the bottom of this. Your Nemo's veering away from shore and heading
up north. But believe you me, I had my fill at the South Pole
and I'm not going with him to the North Pole."
"What can we do, Ned, since it isn't feasible to escape right now?"
"I keep coming back to my idea. We've got to talk to the captain.
When we were in your own country's seas, you didn't say a word.
Now that we're in mine, I intend to speak up. Before a few days
are out, I figure the Nautilus will lie abreast of Nova Scotia,
and from there to Newfoundland is the mouth of a large gulf,
and the St. Lawrence empties into that gulf, and the St. Lawrence
is my own river, the river running by Quebec, my hometown--
and when I think about all this, my gorge rises and my hair
stands on end! Honestly, sir, I'd rather jump overboard!
I can't stay here any longer! I'm suffocating!"
The Canadian was obviously at the end of his patience.
His vigorous nature couldn't adapt to this protracted imprisonment.
His facial appearance was changing by the day. His moods grew gloomier
306
and gloomier. I had a sense of what he was suffering because I also was
gripped by homesickness. Nearly seven months had gone by without our
having any news from shore. Moreover, Captain Nemo's reclusiveness,
his changed disposition, and especially his total silence since the battle
with the devilfish all made me see things in a different light.
I no longer felt the enthusiasm of our first days on board.
You needed to be Flemish like Conseil to accept these circumstances,
living in a habitat designed for cetaceans and other denizens
of the deep. Truly, if that gallant lad had owned gills instead
of lungs, I think he would have made an outstanding fish!
"Well, sir?" Ned Land went on, seeing that I hadn't replied.
"Well, Ned, you want me to ask Captain Nemo what he intends
to do with us?"
"Yes, sir."
"Even though he has already made that clear?"
"Yes. I want it settled once and for all. Speak just for me,
strictly on my behalf, if you want."
"But I rarely encounter him. He positively avoids me."
"All the more reason you should go look him up."
"I'll confer with him, Ned."
"When?" the Canadian asked insistently.
"When I encounter him."
"Professor Aronnax, would you like me to go find him myself?"
"No, let me do it. Tomorrow--"
"Today," Ned Land said.
"So be it. I'll see him today," I answered the Canadian, who,
if he took action himself, would certainly have ruined everything.
I was left to myself. His request granted, I decided to dispose
of it immediately. I like things over and done with.
I reentered my stateroom. From there I could hear movements
inside Captain Nemo's quarters. I couldn't pass up this chance
for an encounter. I knocked on his door. I received no reply.
I knocked again, then tried the knob. The door opened.
I entered. The captain was there. He was bending over his worktable
and hadn't heard me. Determined not to leave without questioning him,
I drew closer. He looked up sharply, with a frowning brow,
and said in a pretty stern tone:
"Oh, it's you! What do you want?"
"To speak with you, captain."
"But I'm busy, sir, I'm at work. I give you the freedom to enjoy
307
your privacy, can't I have the same for myself?"
This reception was less than encouraging. But I was determined
to give as good as I got.
"Sir," I said coolly, "I need to speak with you on a matter that
simply can't wait."
"Whatever could that be, sir?" he replied sarcastically.
"Have you made some discovery that has escaped me? Has the sea
yielded up some novel secret to you?"
We were miles apart. But before I could reply, he showed me
a manuscript open on the table and told me in a more serious tone:
"Here, Professor Aronnax, is a manuscript written in several languages.
It contains a summary of my research under the sea, and God willing, it
won't perish with me. Signed with my name, complete with my life story,
this manuscript will be enclosed in a small, unsinkable contrivance.
The last surviving man on the Nautilus will throw this contrivance
into the sea, and it will go wherever the waves carry it."
The man's name! His life story written by himself!
So the secret of his existence might someday be unveiled?
But just then I saw this announcement only as a lead-in to my topic.
"Captain," I replied, "I'm all praise for this idea you're putting
into effect. The fruits of your research must not be lost.
But the methods you're using strike me as primitive. Who knows where
the winds will take that contrivance, into whose hands it may fall?
Can't you find something better? Can't you or one of your men--"
"Never, sir," the captain said, swiftly interrupting me.
"But my companions and I would be willing to safeguard this manuscript,
and if you give us back our freedom--"
"Your freedom!" Captain Nemo put in, standing up.
"Yes, sir, and that's the subject on which I wanted to confer with you.
For seven months we've been aboard your vessel, and I ask you today,
in the name of my companions as well as myself, if you intend
to keep us here forever."
"Professor Aronnax," Captain Nemo said, "I'll answer you today
just as I did seven months ago: whoever boards the Nautilus must
never leave it."
"What you're inflicting on us is outright slavery!"
"Call it anything you like."
"But every slave has the right to recover his freedom!
By any worthwhile, available means!"
"Who has denied you that right?" Captain Nemo replied.
"Did I ever try to bind you with your word of honor?"
The captain stared at me, crossing his arms.
308
"Sir," I told him, "to take up this subject a second time would
be distasteful to both of us. So let's finish what we've started.
I repeat: it isn't just for myself that I raise this issue.
To me, research is a relief, a potent diversion, an enticement,
a passion that can make me forget everything else. Like you, I'm a man
neglected and unknown, living in the faint hope that someday I can pass
on to future generations the fruits of my labors--figuratively speaking,
by means of some contrivance left to the luck of winds and waves.
In short, I can admire you and comfortably go with you while playing
a role I only partly understand; but I still catch glimpses
of other aspects of your life that are surrounded by involvements
and secrets that, alone on board, my companions and I can't share.
And even when our hearts could beat with yours, moved by some of your
griefs or stirred by your deeds of courage and genius, we've had to stifle
even the slightest token of that sympathy that arises at the sight
of something fine and good, whether it comes from friend or enemy.
All right then! It's this feeling of being alien to your deepest
concerns that makes our situation unacceptable, impossible,
even impossible for me but especially for Ned Land. Every man,
by virtue of his very humanity, deserves fair treatment.
Have you considered how a love of freedom and hatred of slavery could
lead to plans of vengeance in a temperament like the Canadian's,
what he might think, attempt, endeavor . . . ?"
I fell silent. Captain Nemo stood up.
"Ned Land can think, attempt, or endeavor anything he wants,
what difference is it to me? I didn't go looking for him!
I don't keep him on board for my pleasure! As for you, Professor Aronnax,
you're a man able to understand anything, even silence.
I have nothing more to say to you. Let this first time you've come
to discuss this subject also be the last, because a second time I
won't even listen."
I withdrew. From that day forward our position was very strained.
I reported this conversation to my two companions.
"Now we know," Ned said, "that we can't expect a thing from this man.
The Nautilus is nearing Long Island. We'll escape, no matter
what the weather."
But the skies became more and more threatening. There were
conspicuous signs of a hurricane on the way. The atmosphere was
turning white and milky. Slender sheaves of cirrus clouds were
followed on the horizon by layers of nimbocumulus. Other low clouds
fled swiftly. The sea grew towering, inflated by long swells.
Every bird had disappeared except a few petrels, friends of the storms.
The barometer fell significantly, indicating a tremendous tension
in the surrounding haze. The mixture in our stormglass decomposed
under the influence of the electricity charging the air.
A struggle of the elements was approaching.
The storm burst during the daytime of May 13, just as the Nautilus
was cruising abreast of Long Island, a few miles from the narrows
to Upper New York Bay. I'm able to describe this struggle of
the elements because Captain Nemo didn't flee into the ocean depths;
instead, from some inexplicable whim, he decided to brave it out
on the surface.
The wind was blowing from the southwest, initially a stiff breeze,
309
in other words, with a speed of fifteen meters per second,
which built to twenty-five meters near three o'clock in the afternoon.
This is the figure for major storms.
Unshaken by these squalls, Captain Nemo stationed himself
on the platform. He was lashed around the waist to withstand
the monstrous breakers foaming over the deck. I hoisted and attached
myself to the same place, dividing my wonderment between the storm
and this incomparable man who faced it head-on.
The raging sea was swept with huge tattered clouds drenched
by the waves. I saw no more of the small intervening billows
that form in the troughs of the big crests. Just long,
soot-colored undulations with crests so compact they didn't foam.
They kept growing taller. They were spurring each other on.
The Nautilus, sometimes lying on its side, sometimes standing on end
like a mast, rolled and pitched frightfully.
Near five o'clock a torrential rain fell, but it lulled neither
wind nor sea. The hurricane was unleashed at a speed of forty-five
meters per second, hence almost forty leagues per hour.
Under these conditions houses topple, roof tiles puncture doors,
iron railings snap in two, and twenty-four-pounder cannons relocate.
And yet in the midst of this turmoil, the Nautilus lived up to that saying
of an expert engineer: "A well-constructed hull can defy any sea!"
This submersible was no resisting rock that waves could demolish;
it was a steel spindle, obediently in motion, without rigging
or masting, and able to brave their fury with impunity.
Meanwhile I was carefully examining these unleashed breakers.
They measured up to fifteen meters in height over a length
of 150 to 175 meters, and the speed of their propagation
(half that of the wind) was fifteen meters per second.
Their volume and power increased with the depth of the waters.
I then understood the role played by these waves, which trap air
in their flanks and release it in the depths of the sea where its
oxygen brings life. Their utmost pressure--it has been calculated--
can build to 3,000 kilograms on every square foot of surface they strike.
It was such waves in the Hebrides that repositioned a stone block
weighing 84,000 pounds. It was their relatives in the tidal wave
on December 23, 1854, that toppled part of the Japanese city of Tokyo,
then went that same day at 700 kilometers per hour to break on
the beaches of America.
After nightfall the storm grew in intensity. As in the 1860 cyclone
on Réunion Island, the barometer fell to 710 millimeters. At the close
of day, I saw a big ship passing on the horizon, struggling painfully.
It lay to at half steam in an effort to hold steady on the waves.
It must have been a steamer on one of those lines out of New York
to Liverpool or Le Havre. It soon vanished into the shadows.
At ten o'clock in the evening, the skies caught on fire.
The air was streaked with violent flashes of lightning.
I couldn't stand this brightness, but Captain Nemo stared
straight at it, as if to inhale the spirit of the storm.
A dreadful noise filled the air, a complicated noise made up of the roar
of crashing breakers, the howl of the wind, claps of thunder.
The wind shifted to every point of the horizon, and the cyclone
left the east to return there after passing through north, west,
and south, moving in the opposite direction of revolving storms
310
in the southern hemisphere.
Oh, that Gulf Stream! It truly lives up to its nickname,
the Lord of Storms! All by itself it creates these fearsome
cyclones through the difference in temperature between its currents
and the superimposed layers of air.
The rain was followed by a downpour of fire. Droplets of water
changed into exploding tufts. You would have thought Captain Nemo was
courting a death worthy of himself, seeking to be struck by lightning.
In one hideous pitching movement, the Nautilus reared its steel
spur into the air like a lightning rod, and I saw long sparks
shoot down it.
Shattered, at the end of my strength, I slid flat on my belly
to the hatch. I opened it and went below to the lounge.
By then the storm had reached its maximum intensity.
It was impossible to stand upright inside the Nautilus.
Captain Nemo reentered near midnight. I could hear the ballast
tanks filling little by little, and the Nautilus sank gently beneath
the surface of the waves.
Through the lounge's open windows, I saw large, frightened fish
passing like phantoms in the fiery waters. Some were struck
by lightning right before my eyes!
The Nautilus kept descending. I thought it would find calm again at
fifteen meters down. No. The upper strata were too violently agitated.
It needed to sink to fifty meters, searching for a resting place
in the bowels of the sea.
But once there, what tranquility we found, what silence, what peace
all around us! Who would have known that a dreadful hurricane
was then unleashed on the surface of this ocean?
311
CHAPTER 20
In Latitude 47 degrees 24' and Longitude 17 degrees 28'
IN THE AFTERMATH of this storm, we were thrown back to the east.
Away went any hope of
escaping to the landing places of New York or the St. Lawrence.
In despair, poor Ned went into seclusion like Captain Nemo. Conseil and
I no longer left each other.
As I said, the Nautilus veered to the east. To be more accurate,
I should have said to the northeast. Sometimes on the surface
of the waves, sometimes beneath them, the ship wandered for days
amid these mists so feared by navigators. These are caused
chiefly by melting ice, which keeps the air extremely damp.
How many ships have perished in these waterways as they
tried to get directions from the hazy lights on the coast!
How many casualties have been caused by these opaque mists!
How many collisions have occurred with these reefs,
where the breaking surf is covered by the noise of the wind!
How many vessels have rammed each other, despite their running lights,
despite the warnings given by their bosun's pipes and alarm bells!
So the floor of this sea had the appearance of a battlefield where every
ship defeated by the ocean still lay, some already old and encrusted,
others newer and reflecting our beacon light on their ironwork
and copper undersides. Among these vessels, how many went down with
all hands, with their crews and hosts of immigrants, at these trouble
spots so prominent in the statistics: Cape Race, St. Paul Island,
the Strait of Belle Isle, the St. Lawrence estuary!
And in only a few years, how many victims have been furnished to
the obituary notices by the Royal Mail, Inman, and Montreal lines;
by vessels named the Solway, the Isis, the Paramatta, the Hungarian,
the Canadian, the Anglo-Saxon, the Humboldt, and the United States,
all run aground; by the Arctic and the Lyonnais, sunk in collisions;
by the President, the Pacific, and the City of Glasgow,
lost for reasons unknown; in the midst of their gloomy rubble,
the Nautilus navigated as if passing the dead in review!
By May 15 we were off the southern tip of the Grand Banks
of Newfoundland. These banks are the result of marine sedimentation,
an extensive accumulation of organic waste brought either from
the equator by the Gulf Stream's current, or from the North Pole
by the countercurrent of cold water that skirts the American coast.
Here, too, erratically drifting chunks collect from the ice breakup.
Here a huge boneyard forms from fish, mollusks, and zoophytes dying
over it by the billions.
The sea is of no great depth at the Grand Banks. A few hundred
fathoms at best. But to the south there is a deep, suddenly occurring
depression, a 3,000-meter pit. Here the Gulf Stream widens.
Its waters come to full bloom. It loses its speed and temperature,
but it turns into a sea.
Among the fish that the Nautilus startled on its way, I'll mention
a one-meter lumpfish, blackish on top with orange on the belly
and rare among its brethren in that it practices monogamy,
a good-sized eelpout, a type of emerald moray whose flavor is excellent,
312
wolffish with big eyes in a head somewhat resembling a canine's,
viviparous blennies whose eggs hatch inside their bodies like those
of snakes, bloated gobio (or black gudgeon) measuring two decimeters,
grenadiers with long tails and gleaming with a silvery glow,
speedy fish venturing far from their High Arctic seas.
Our nets also hauled in a bold, daring, vigorous, and muscular
fish armed with prickles on its head and stings on its fins,
a real scorpion measuring two to three meters, the ruthless enemy
of cod, blennies, and salmon; it was the bullhead of the northerly seas,
a fish with red fins and a brown body covered with nodules.
The Nautilus's fishermen had some trouble getting a grip on
this animal, which, thanks to the formation of its gill covers,
can protect its respiratory organs from any parching contact
with the air and can live out of water for a good while.
And I'll mention--for the record--some little banded blennies that
follow ships into the northernmost seas, sharp-snouted carp exclusive
to the north Atlantic, scorpionfish, and lastly the gadoid family,
chiefly the cod species, which I detected in their waters of choice
over these inexhaustible Grand Banks.
Because Newfoundland is simply an underwater peak, you could
call these cod mountain fish. While the Nautilus was clearing
a path through their tight ranks, Conseil couldn't refrain from
making this comment:
"Mercy, look at these cod!" he said. "Why, I thought cod were flat,
like dab or sole!"
"Innocent boy!" I exclaimed. "Cod are flat only at the
grocery store, where they're cut open and spread out on display.
But in the water they're like mullet, spindle-shaped and perfectly
built for speed."
"I can easily believe master," Conseil replied. "But what crowds
of them! What swarms!"
"Bah! My friend, there'd be many more without their enemies,
scorpionfish and human beings! Do you know how many eggs have been
counted in a single female?"
"I'll go all out," Conseil replied. "500,000."
"11,000,000, my friend."
"11,000,000! I refuse to accept that until I count them myself."
"So count them, Conseil. But it would be less work to believe me.
Besides, Frenchmen, Englishmen, Americans, Danes, and Norwegians catch
these cod by the thousands. They're eaten in prodigious quantities,
and without the astonishing fertility of these fish, the seas
would soon be depopulated of them. Accordingly, in England and
America alone, 5,000 ships manned by 75,000 seamen go after cod.
Each ship brings back an average catch of 4,400 fish, making 22,000,000.
Off the coast of Norway, the total is the same."
"Fine," Conseil replied, "I'll take master's word for it.
I won't count them."
313
"Count what?"
"Those 11,000,000 eggs. But I'll make one comment."
"What's that?"
"If all their eggs hatched, just four codfish could feed
England, America, and Norway."
As we skimmed the depths of the Grand Banks, I could see perfectly
those long fishing lines, each armed with 200 hooks, that every
boat dangled by the dozens. The lower end of each line dragged
the bottom by means of a small grappling iron, and at the surface
it was secured to the buoy-rope of a cork float. The Nautilus had
to maneuver shrewdly in the midst of this underwater spiderweb.
But the ship didn't stay long in these heavily traveled waterways.
It went up to about latitude 42 degrees. This brought it
abreast of St. John's in Newfoundland and Heart's Content,
where the Atlantic Cable reaches its end point.
Instead of continuing north, the Nautilus took an easterly heading,
as if to go along this plateau on which the telegraph cable rests,
where multiple soundings have given the contours of the terrain
with the utmost accuracy.
It was on May 17, about 500 miles from Heart's Content and 2,800
meters down, that I spotted this cable lying on the seafloor.
Conseil, whom I hadn't alerted, mistook it at first for a gigantic
sea snake and was gearing up to classify it in his best manner.
But I enlightened the fine lad and let him down gently by giving
him various details on the laying of this cable.
The first cable was put down during the years 1857-1858;
but after transmitting about 400 telegrams, it went dead.
In 1863 engineers built a new cable that measured 3,400 kilometers,
weighed 4,500 metric tons, and was shipped aboard the Great Eastern.
This attempt also failed.
Now then, on May 25 while submerged to a depth of 3,836 meters,
the Nautilus lay in precisely the locality where this second
cable suffered the rupture that ruined the undertaking.
It happened 638 miles from the coast of Ireland. At around two
o'clock in the afternoon, all contact with Europe broke off.
The electricians on board decided to cut the cable before fishing it up,
and by eleven o'clock that evening they had retrieved the damaged part.
They repaired the joint and its splice; then the cable was resubmerged.
But a few days later it snapped again and couldn't be recovered
from the ocean depths.
These Americans refused to give up. The daring Cyrus Field,
who had risked his whole fortune to promote this undertaking,
called for a new bond issue. It sold out immediately. Another cable
was put down under better conditions. Its sheaves of conducting wire
were insulated within a gutta-percha covering, which was protected
by a padding of textile material enclosed in a metal sheath.
The Great Eastern put back to sea on July 13, 1866.
The operation proceeded apace. Yet there was one hitch.
As they gradually unrolled this third cable, the electricians observed
314
on several occasions that someone had recently driven nails into it,
trying to damage its core. Captain Anderson, his officers,
and the engineers put their heads together, then posted a warning that if
the culprit were detected, he would be thrown overboard without a trial.
After that, these villainous attempts were not repeated.
By July 23 the Great Eastern was lying no farther than 800
kilometers from Newfoundland when it received telegraphed news from
Ireland of an armistice signed between Prussia and Austria after
the Battle of Sadova. Through the mists on the 27th, it sighted
the port of Heart's Content. The undertaking had ended happily,
and in its first dispatch, young America addressed old Europe with
these wise words so rarely understood: "Glory to God in the highest,
and peace on earth to men of good will."
I didn't expect to find this electric cable in mint condition,
as it looked on leaving its place of manufacture. The long snake
was covered with seashell rubble and bristling with foraminifera;
a crust of caked gravel protected it from any mollusks that might
bore into it. It rested serenely, sheltered from the sea's motions,
under a pressure favorable to the transmission of that electric
spark that goes from America to Europe in 32/100 of a second.
This cable will no doubt last indefinitely because, as observers note,
its gutta-percha casing is improved by a stay in salt water.
Besides, on this well-chosen plateau, the cable never lies at
depths that could cause a break. The Nautilus followed it to its
lowest reaches, located 4,431 meters down, and even there it rested
without any stress or strain. Then we returned to the locality
where the 1863 accident had taken place.
There the ocean floor formed a valley 120 kilometers wide,
into which you could fit Mt. Blanc without its summit poking above
the surface of the waves. This valley is closed off to the east
by a sheer wall 2,000 meters high. We arrived there on May 28,
and the Nautilus lay no farther than 150 kilometers from Ireland.
Would Captain Nemo head up north and beach us on the British Isles?
No. Much to my surprise, he went back down south and returned
to European seas. As we swung around the Emerald Isle, I spotted
Cape Clear for an instant, plus the lighthouse on Fastnet Rock
that guides all those thousands of ships setting out from
Glasgow or Liverpool.
An important question then popped into my head. Would the Nautilus
dare to tackle the English Channel? Ned Land (who promptly
reappeared after we hugged shore) never stopped questioning me.
What could I answer him? Captain Nemo remained invisible.
After giving the Canadian a glimpse of American shores, was he about
to show me the coast of France?
But the Nautilus kept gravitating southward. On May 30, in sight
of Land's End, it passed between the lowermost tip of England
and the Scilly Islands, which it left behind to starboard.
If it was going to enter the English Channel, it clearly needed
to head east. It did not.
All day long on May 31, the Nautilus swept around the sea
in a series of circles that had me deeply puzzled. It seemed
315
to be searching for a locality that it had some trouble finding.
At noon Captain Nemo himself came to take our bearings.
He didn't address a word to me. He looked gloomier than ever.
What was filling him with such sadness? Was it our proximity to
these European shores? Was he reliving his memories of that country
he had left behind? If so, what did he feel? Remorse or regret?
For a good while these thoughts occupied my mind, and I had a hunch
that fate would soon give away the captain's secrets.
The next day, June 1, the Nautilus kept to the same tack.
It was obviously trying to locate some precise spot in the ocean.
Just as on the day before, Captain Nemo came to take the altitude
of the sun. The sea was smooth, the skies clear. Eight miles
to the east, a big steamship was visible on the horizon line.
No flag was flapping from the gaff of its fore-and-aft sail,
and I couldn't tell its nationality.
A few minutes before the sun passed its zenith, Captain Nemo
raised his sextant and took his sights with the utmost precision.
The absolute calm of the waves facilitated this operation.
The Nautilus lay motionless, neither rolling nor pitching.
I was on the platform just then. After determining our position,
the captain pronounced only these words:
"It's right here!"
He went down the hatch. Had he seen that vessel change course
and seemingly head toward us? I'm unable to say.
I returned to the lounge. The hatch closed, and I heard water hissing
in the ballast tanks. The Nautilus began to sink on a vertical line,
because its propeller was in check and no longer furnished
any forward motion.
Some minutes later it stopped at a depth of 833 meters and came
to rest on the seafloor.
The ceiling lights in the lounge then went out, the panels opened,
and through the windows I saw, for a half-mile radius, the sea
brightly lit by the beacon's rays.
I looked to port and saw nothing but the immenseness of
these tranquil waters.
To starboard, a prominent bulge on the sea bottom caught my attention.
You would have thought it was some ruin enshrouded in a crust
of whitened seashells, as if under a mantle of snow.
Carefully examining this mass, I could identify the swollen outlines
of a ship shorn of its masts, which must have sunk bow first.
This casualty certainly dated from some far-off time.
To be so caked with the limestone of these waters, this wreckage
must have spent many a year on the ocean floor.
What ship was this? Why had the Nautilus come to visit its grave?
Was it something other than a maritime accident that had dragged
this craft under the waters?
I wasn't sure what to think, but next to me I heard Captain Nemo's
voice slowly say:
316
"Originally this ship was christened the Marseillais. It carried
seventy-four cannons and was launched in 1762. On August 13,
1778, commanded by La Poype-Vertrieux, it fought valiantly
against the Preston. On July 4, 1779, as a member of the squadron
under Admiral d'Estaing, it assisted in the capture of the island
of Grenada. On September 5, 1781, under the Count de Grasse,
it took part in the Battle of Chesapeake Bay. In 1794 the new Republic
of France changed the name of this ship. On April 16 of that same year,
it joined the squadron at Brest under Rear Admiral Villaret de Joyeuse,
who was entrusted with escorting a convoy of wheat coming from
America under the command of Admiral Van Stabel. In this second
year of the French Revolutionary Calendar, on the 11th and 12th
days in the Month of Pasture, this squadron fought an encounter
with English vessels. Sir, today is June 1, 1868, or the 13th
day in the Month of Pasture. Seventy-four years ago to the day,
at this very spot in latitude 47 degrees 24' and longitude 17 degrees
28', this ship sank after a heroic battle; its three masts gone,
water in its hold, a third of its crew out of action, it preferred
to go to the bottom with its 356 seamen rather than surrender;
and with its flag nailed up on the afterdeck, it disappeared beneath
the waves to shouts of 'Long live the Republic!'"
"This is the Avenger!" I exclaimed.
"Yes, sir! The Avenger! A splendid name!" Captain Nemo murmured,
crossing his arms.
317
CHAPTER 21
A Mass Execution
THE WAY HE SAID THIS, the unexpectedness of this scene, first the
biography of this patriotic ship, then the excitement with which this
eccentric individual pronounced these last words--the name Avenger
whose significance could not escape me--all this, taken together,
had a profound impact on my mind. My eyes never left the captain.
Hands outstretched toward the sea, he contemplated the proud
wreck with blazing eyes. Perhaps I would never learn who he was,
where he came from or where he was heading, but more and more I
could see a distinction between the man and the scientist.
It was no ordinary misanthropy that kept Captain Nemo and his companions
sequestered inside the Nautilus's plating, but a hate so monstrous
or so sublime that the passing years could never weaken it.
Did this hate also hunger for vengeance? Time would soon tell.
Meanwhile the Nautilus rose slowly to the surface of the sea, and I
watched the Avenger's murky shape disappearing little by little.
Soon a gentle rolling told me that we were afloat in the open air.
Just then a hollow explosion was audible. I looked at the captain.
The captain did not stir.
"Captain?" I said.
He didn't reply.
I left him and climbed onto the platform. Conseil and the Canadian
were already there.
"What caused that explosion?" I asked.
"A cannon going off," Ned Land replied.
I stared in the direction of the ship I had spotted. It was heading
toward the Nautilus, and you could tell it had put on steam.
Six miles separated it from us.
"What sort of craft is it, Ned?"
"From its rigging and its low masts," the Canadian replied,
"I bet it's a warship. Here's hoping it pulls up and sinks this
damned Nautilus!"
"Ned my friend," Conseil replied, "what harm could it do
the Nautilus? Will it attack us under the waves? Will it cannonade
us at the bottom of the sea?"
"Tell me, Ned," I asked, "can you make out the nationality
of that craft?"
Creasing his brow, lowering his lids, and puckering the corners
of his eyes, the Canadian focused the full power of his gaze on
the ship for a short while.
"No, sir," he replied. "I can't make out what nation it's from.
318
It's flying no flag. But I'll swear it's a warship, because there's
a long pennant streaming from the peak of its mainmast."
For a quarter of an hour, we continued to watch the craft bearing
down on us. But it was inconceivable to me that it had discovered
the Nautilus at such a distance, still less that it knew what this
underwater machine really was.
Soon the Canadian announced that the craft was a big battleship,
a double-decker ironclad complete with ram. Dark, dense smoke
burst from its two funnels. Its furled sails merged with the lines
of its yardarms. The gaff of its fore-and-aft sail flew no flag.
Its distance still kept us from distinguishing the colors of its pennant,
which was fluttering like a thin ribbon.
It was coming on fast. If Captain Nemo let it approach, a chance
for salvation might be available to us.
"Sir," Ned Land told me, "if that boat gets within a mile of us,
I'm jumping overboard, and I suggest you follow suit."
I didn't reply to the Canadian's proposition but kept watching
the ship, which was looming larger on the horizon. Whether it
was English, French, American, or Russian, it would surely welcome
us aboard if we could just get to it.
"Master may recall," Conseil then said, "that we have some experience
with swimming. He can rely on me to tow him to that vessel,
if he's agreeable to going with our friend Ned."
Before I could reply, white smoke streamed from the battleship's bow.
Then, a few seconds later, the waters splashed astern of the Nautilus,
disturbed by the fall of a heavy object. Soon after, an explosion
struck my ears.
"What's this? They're firing at us!" I exclaimed.
"Good lads!" the Canadian muttered.
"That means they don't see us as castaways clinging to some wreckage!"
"With all due respect to master--gracious!" Conseil put in,
shaking off the water that had sprayed over him from another shell.
"With all due respect to master, they've discovered the narwhale
and they're cannonading the same."
"But it must be clear to them," I exclaimed, "that they're dealing
with human beings."
"Maybe that's why!" Ned Land replied, staring hard at me.
The full truth dawned on me. Undoubtedly people now knew
where they stood on the existence of this so-called monster.
Undoubtedly the latter's encounter with the Abraham Lincoln,
when the Canadian hit it with his harpoon, had led Commander Farragut
to recognize the narwhale as actually an underwater boat,
more dangerous than any unearthly cetacean!
Yes, this had to be the case, and undoubtedly they were now chasing
this dreadful engine of destruction on every sea!
319
Dreadful indeed, if, as we could assume, Captain Nemo
had been using the Nautilus in works of vengeance!
That night in the middle of the Indian Ocean, when he imprisoned
us in the cell, hadn't he attacked some ship? That man now buried
in the coral cemetery, wasn't he the victim of some collision
caused by the Nautilus? Yes, I repeat: this had to be the case.
One part of Captain Nemo's secret life had been unveiled.
And now, even though his identity was still unknown, at least
the nations allied against him knew they were no longer hunting
some fairy-tale monster, but a man who had sworn an implacable
hate toward them!
This whole fearsome sequence of events appeared in my mind's eye.
Instead of encountering friends on this approaching ship, we would
find only pitiless enemies.
Meanwhile shells fell around us in increasing numbers.
Some, meeting the liquid surface, would ricochet and vanish into the sea
at considerable distances. But none of them reached the Nautilus.
By then the ironclad was no more than three miles off. Despite its
violent cannonade, Captain Nemo hadn't appeared on the platform.
And yet if one of those conical shells had scored a routine hit
on the Nautilus's hull, it could have been fatal to him.
The Canadian then told me:
"Sir, we've got to do everything we can to get out of this jam!
Let's signal them! Damnation! Maybe they'll realize
we're decent people!"
Ned Land pulled out his handkerchief to wave it in the air.
But he had barely unfolded it when he was felled by an iron fist,
and despite his great strength, he tumbled to the deck.
"Scum!" the captain shouted. "Do you want to be nailed to the Nautilus's
spur before it charges that ship?"
Dreadful to hear, Captain Nemo was even more dreadful to see.
His face was pale from some spasm of his heart, which must have stopped
beating for an instant. His pupils were hideously contracted.
His voice was no longer speaking, it was bellowing. Bending from
the waist, he shook the Canadian by the shoulders.
Then, dropping Ned and turning to the battleship, whose shells
were showering around him:
"O ship of an accursed nation, you know who I am!" he shouted
in his powerful voice. "And I don't need your colors to
recognize you! Look! I'll show you mine!"
And in the bow of the platform, Captain Nemo unfurled a black flag,
like the one he had left planted at the South Pole.
Just then a shell hit the Nautilus's hull obliquely, failed to breach it,
ricocheted near the captain, and vanished into the sea.
Captain Nemo shrugged his shoulders. Then, addressing me:
320
"Go below!" he told me in a curt tone. "You and your companions,
go below!"
"Sir," I exclaimed, "are you going to attack this ship?"
"Sir, I'm going to sink it."
"You wouldn't!"
"I will," Captain Nemo replied icily. "You're ill-advised to pass
judgment on me, sir. Fate has shown you what you weren't meant
to see. The attack has come. Our reply will be dreadful.
Get back inside!"
"From what country is that ship?"
"You don't know? Fine, so much the better! At least its nationality
will remain a secret to you. Go below!"
The Canadian, Conseil, and I could only obey. Some fifteen
of the Nautilus's seamen surrounded their captain and stared with
a feeling of implacable hate at the ship bearing down on them.
You could feel the same spirit of vengeance enkindling their every soul.
I went below just as another projectile scraped the Nautilus's hull,
and I heard the captain exclaim:
"Shoot, you demented vessel! Shower your futile shells! You won't escape
the Nautilus's spur! But this isn't the place where you'll perish!
I don't want your wreckage mingling with that of the Avenger!"
I repaired to my stateroom. The captain and his chief officer
stayed on the platform. The propeller was set in motion.
The Nautilus swiftly retreated, putting us outside the range
of the vessel's shells. But the chase continued, and Captain Nemo
was content to keep his distance.
Near four o'clock in the afternoon, unable to control the impatience
and uneasiness devouring me, I went back to the central companionway.
The hatch was open. I ventured onto the platform. The captain was
still strolling there, his steps agitated. He stared at the ship,
which stayed to his leeward five or six miles off. He was circling it
like a wild beast, drawing it eastward, letting it chase after him.
Yet he didn't attack. Was he, perhaps, still undecided?
I tried to intervene one last time. But I had barely queried
Captain Nemo when the latter silenced me:
"I'm the law, I'm the tribunal! I'm the oppressed, and there
are my oppressors! Thanks to them, I've witnessed the destruction
of everything I loved, cherished, and venerated--homeland, wife,
children, father, and mother! There lies everything I hate!
Not another word out of you!"
I took a last look at the battleship, which was putting on steam.
Then I rejoined Ned and Conseil.
"We'll escape!" I exclaimed.
"Good," Ned put in. "Where's that ship from?"
321
"I've no idea. But wherever it's from, it will sink before nightfall.
In any event, it's better to perish with it than be accomplices
in some act of revenge whose merits we can't gauge."
"That's my feeling," Ned Land replied coolly. "Let's wait for nightfall."
Night fell. A profound silence reigned on board. The compass
indicated that the Nautilus hadn't changed direction. I could hear
the beat of its propeller, churning the waves with steady speed.
Staying on the surface of the water, it rolled gently, sometimes to
one side, sometimes to the other.
My companions and I had decided to escape as soon as the vessel came
close enough for us to be heard--or seen, because the moon would wax
full in three days and was shining brightly. Once we were aboard
that ship, if we couldn't ward off the blow that threatened it,
at least we could do everything that circumstances permitted.
Several times I thought the Nautilus was about to attack.
But it was content to let its adversary approach, and then it would
quickly resume its retreating ways.
Part of the night passed without incident. We kept watch for an
opportunity to take action. We talked little, being too keyed up.
Ned Land was all for jumping overboard. I forced him to wait.
As I saw it, the Nautilus would attack the double-decker on
the surface of the waves, and then it would be not only possible
but easy to escape.
At three o'clock in the morning, full of uneasiness,
I climbed onto the platform. Captain Nemo hadn't left it.
He stood in the bow next to his flag, which a mild breeze was
unfurling above his head. His eyes never left that vessel.
The extraordinary intensity of his gaze seemed to attract it,
beguile it, and draw it more surely than if he had it in tow!
The moon then passed its zenith. Jupiter was rising in the east.
In the midst of this placid natural setting, sky and ocean competed
with each other in tranquility, and the sea offered the orb of night
the loveliest mirror ever to reflect its image.
And when I compared this deep calm of the elements with all the fury
seething inside the plating of this barely perceptible Nautilus, I
shivered all over.
The vessel was two miles off. It drew nearer, always moving toward
the phosphorescent glow that signaled the Nautilus's presence.
I saw its green and red running lights, plus the white lantern hanging
from the large stay of its foremast. Hazy flickerings were reflected
on its rigging and indicated that its furnaces were pushed to the limit.
Showers of sparks and cinders of flaming coal escaped from its funnels,
spangling the air with stars.
I stood there until six o'clock in the morning, Captain Nemo
never seeming to notice me. The vessel lay a mile and a half off,
and with the first glimmers of daylight, it resumed its cannonade.
The time couldn't be far away when the Nautilus would attack
its adversary, and my companions and I would leave forever this
man I dared not judge.
322
I was about to go below to alert them, when the chief officer
climbed onto the platform. Several seamen were with him.
Captain Nemo didn't see them, or didn't want to see them.
They carried out certain procedures that, on the Nautilus, you could
call "clearing the decks for action." They were quite simple.
The manropes that formed a handrail around the platform were lowered.
Likewise the pilothouse and the beacon housing were withdrawn
into the hull until they lay exactly flush with it. The surface
of this long sheet-iron cigar no longer offered a single protrusion
that could hamper its maneuvers.
I returned to the lounge. The Nautilus still emerged above
the surface. A few morning gleams infiltrated the liquid strata.
Beneath the undulations of the billows, the windows were enlivened
by the blushing of the rising sun. That dreadful day of June
2 had dawned.
At seven o'clock the log told me that the Nautilus had reduced speed.
I realized that it was letting the warship approach.
Moreover, the explosions grew more intensely audible.
Shells furrowed the water around us, drilling through it with an
odd hissing sound.
"My friends," I said, "it's time. Let's shake hands, and may God
be with us!"
Ned Land was determined, Conseil calm, I myself nervous and
barely in control.
We went into the library. Just as I pushed open the door leading
to the well of the central companionway, I heard the hatch
close sharply overhead.
The Canadian leaped up the steps, but I stopped him. A well-known
hissing told me that water was entering the ship's ballast tanks.
Indeed, in a few moments the Nautilus had submerged some meters
below the surface of the waves.
I understood this maneuver. It was too late to take action.
The Nautilus wasn't going to strike the double-decker where it
was clad in impenetrable iron armor, but below its waterline,
where the metal carapace no longer protected its planking.
We were prisoners once more, unwilling spectators at the performance
of this gruesome drama. But we barely had time to think. Taking refuge
in my stateroom, we stared at each other without pronouncing a word.
My mind was in a total daze. My mental processes came to a dead stop.
I hovered in that painful state that predominates during
the period of anticipation before some frightful explosion.
I waited, I listened, I lived only through my sense of hearing!
Meanwhile the Nautilus's speed had increased appreciably.
So it was gathering momentum. Its entire hull was vibrating.
Suddenly I let out a yell. There had been a collision, but it
was comparatively mild. I could feel the penetrating force
of the steel spur. I could hear scratchings and scrapings.
Carried away with its driving power, the Nautilus had passed through
the vessel's mass like a sailmaker's needle through canvas!
323
I couldn't hold still. Frantic, going insane, I leaped out of my
stateroom and rushed into the lounge.
Captain Nemo was there. Mute, gloomy, implacable, he was staring
through the port panel.
An enormous mass was sinking beneath the waters, and the Nautilus,
missing none of its death throes, was descending into the depths with it.
Ten meters away, I could see its gaping hull, into which water was rushing
with a sound of thunder, then its double rows of cannons and railings.
Its deck was covered with dark, quivering shadows.
The water was rising. Those poor men leaped up into the shrouds,
clung to the masts, writhed beneath the waters. It was a human
anthill that an invading sea had caught by surprise!
Paralyzed, rigid with anguish, my hair standing on end, my eyes popping
out of my head, short of breath, suffocating, speechless, I stared--
I too! I was glued to the window by an irresistible allure!
The enormous vessel settled slowly. Following it down, the Nautilus
kept watch on its every movement. Suddenly there was an eruption.
The air compressed inside the craft sent its decks flying,
as if the powder stores had been ignited. The thrust of the waters
was so great, the Nautilus swerved away.
The poor ship then sank more swiftly. Its mastheads appeared,
laden with victims, then its crosstrees bending under clusters of men,
finally the peak of its mainmast. Then the dark mass disappeared,
and with it a crew of corpses dragged under by fearsome eddies. . . .
I turned to Captain Nemo. This dreadful executioner, this true
archangel of hate, was still staring. When it was all over,
Captain Nemo headed to the door of his stateroom, opened it, and entered.
I followed him with my eyes.
On the rear paneling, beneath the portraits of his heroes, I saw
the portrait of a still-youthful woman with two little children.
Captain Nemo stared at them for a few moments, stretched out his
arms to them, sank to his knees, and melted into sobs.
324
CHAPTER 22
The Last Words of Captain Nemo
THE PANELS CLOSED over this frightful view, but the lights didn't go
on in the lounge. Inside the Nautilus all was gloom and silence.
It left this place of devastation with prodigious speed,
100 feet beneath the waters. Where was it going? North or south?
Where would the man flee after this horrible act of revenge?
I reentered my stateroom, where Ned and Conseil were waiting silently.
Captain Nemo filled me with insurmountable horror.
Whatever he had once suffered at the hands of humanity,
he had no right to mete out such punishment. He had made me,
if not an accomplice, at least an eyewitness to his vengeance!
Even this was intolerable.
At eleven o'clock the electric lights came back on. I went into
the lounge. It was deserted. I consulted the various instruments.
The Nautilus was fleeing northward at a speed of twenty-five miles
per hour, sometimes on the surface of the sea, sometimes thirty
feet beneath it.
After our position had been marked on the chart, I saw that we
were passing into the mouth of the English Channel, that our heading
would take us to the northernmost seas with incomparable speed.
I could barely glimpse the swift passing of longnose sharks,
hammerhead sharks, spotted dogfish that frequent these waters,
big eagle rays, swarms of seahorse looking like knights on a chessboard,
eels quivering like fireworks serpents, armies of crab that fled
obliquely by crossing their pincers over their carapaces,
finally schools of porpoise that held contests of speed with
the Nautilus. But by this point observing, studying, and classifying
were out of the question.
By evening we had cleared 200 leagues up the Atlantic. Shadows gathered
and gloom overran the sea until the moon came up.
I repaired to my stateroom. I couldn't sleep. I was assaulted
by nightmares. That horrible scene of destruction kept repeating
in my mind's eye.
From that day forward, who knows where the Nautilus took us
in the north Atlantic basin? Always at incalculable speed!
Always amid the High Arctic mists! Did it call at the capes
of Spitzbergen or the shores of Novaya Zemlya? Did it visit such
uncharted seas as the White Sea, the Kara Sea, the Gulf of Ob,
the Lyakhov Islands, or those unknown beaches on the Siberian coast?
I'm unable to say. I lost track of the passing hours. Time was
in abeyance on the ship's clocks. As happens in the polar regions,
it seemed that night and day no longer followed their normal sequence.
I felt myself being drawn into that strange domain where
the overwrought imagination of Edgar Allan Poe was at home.
Like his fabled Arthur Gordon Pym, I expected any moment to see
that "shrouded human figure, very far larger in its proportions
than any dweller among men," thrown across the cataract that protects
the outskirts of the pole!
325
I estimate--but perhaps I'm mistaken--that the Nautilus's haphazard
course continued for fifteen or twenty days, and I'm not sure
how long this would have gone on without the catastrophe that ended
our voyage. As for Captain Nemo, he was no longer in the picture.
As for his chief officer, the same applied. Not one crewman
was visible for a single instant. The Nautilus cruised beneath
the waters almost continuously. When it rose briefly to the surface
to renew our air, the hatches opened and closed as if automated.
No more positions were reported on the world map. I didn't know
where we were.
I'll also mention that the Canadian, at the end of his strength
and patience, made no further appearances. Conseil couldn't coax
a single word out of him and feared that, in a fit of delirium while
under the sway of a ghastly homesickness, Ned would kill himself.
So he kept a devoted watch on his friend every instant.
You can appreciate that under these conditions, our situation
had become untenable.
One morning--whose date I'm unable to specify--I was slumbering
near the first hours of daylight, a painful, sickly slumber.
Waking up, I saw Ned Land leaning over me, and I heard him tell me
in a low voice:
"We're going to escape!"
I sat up.
"When?" I asked.
"Tonight. There doesn't seem to be any supervision left on
the Nautilus. You'd think a total daze was reigning on board.
Will you be ready, sir?"
"Yes. Where are we?"
"In sight of land. I saw it through the mists just this morning,
twenty miles to the east."
"What land is it?"
"I've no idea, but whatever it is, there we'll take refuge."
"Yes, Ned! We'll escape tonight even if the sea swallows us up!"
"The sea's rough, the wind's blowing hard, but a twenty-mile
run in the Nautilus's nimble longboat doesn't scare me.
Unknown to the crew, I've stowed some food and flasks of water inside."
"I'm with you."
"What's more," the Canadian added, "if they catch me, I'll defend myself,
I'll fight to the death."
"Then we'll die together, Ned my friend."
My mind was made up. The Canadian left me. I went out on the platform,
where I could barely stand upright against the jolts of the billows.
The skies were threatening, but land lay inside those dense mists,
326
and we had to escape. Not a single day, or even a single hour,
could we afford to lose.
I returned to the lounge, dreading yet desiring an encounter
with Captain Nemo, wanting yet not wanting to see him.
What would I say to him? How could I hide the involuntary horror
he inspired in me? No! It was best not to meet him face to face!
Best to try and forget him! And yet . . . !
How long that day seemed, the last I would spend aboard
the Nautilus! I was left to myself. Ned Land and Conseil avoided
speaking to me, afraid they would give themselves away.
At six o'clock I ate supper, but I had no appetite. Despite my revulsion,
I forced it down, wanting to keep my strength up.
At 6:30 Ned Land entered my stateroom. He told me:
"We won't see each other again before we go. At ten o'clock
the moon won't be up yet. We'll take advantage of the darkness.
Come to the skiff. Conseil and I will be inside waiting for you."
The Canadian left without giving me time to answer him.
I wanted to verify the Nautilus's heading. I made my way to the lounge.
We were racing north-northeast with frightful speed, fifty meters down.
I took one last look at the natural wonders and artistic treasures
amassed in the museum, this unrivaled collection doomed to perish
someday in the depths of the seas, together with its curator.
I wanted to establish one supreme impression in my mind.
I stayed there an hour, basking in the aura of the ceiling lights,
passing in review the treasures shining in their glass cases.
Then I returned to my stateroom.
There I dressed in sturdy seafaring clothes. I gathered my notes and
packed them tenderly about my person. My heart was pounding mightily.
I couldn't curb its pulsations. My anxiety and agitation would
certainly have given me away if Captain Nemo had seen me.
What was he doing just then? I listened at the door to his stateroom.
I heard the sound of footsteps. Captain Nemo was inside.
He hadn't gone to bed. With his every movement I imagined he would
appear and ask me why I wanted to escape! I felt in a perpetual
state of alarm. My imagination magnified this sensation.
The feeling became so acute, I wondered whether it wouldn't be
better to enter the captain's stateroom, dare him face to face,
brave it out with word and deed!
It was an insane idea. Fortunately I controlled myself
and stretched out on the bed to soothe my bodily agitation.
My nerves calmed a little, but with my brain so aroused,
I did a swift review of my whole existence aboard the Nautilus,
every pleasant or unpleasant incident that had crossed my path since I
went overboard from the Abraham Lincoln: the underwater hunting trip,
the Torres Strait, our running aground, the savages of Papua,
the coral cemetery, the Suez passageway, the island of Santorini,
the Cretan diver, the Bay of Vigo, Atlantis, the Ice Bank, the South Pole,
our imprisonment in the ice, the battle with the devilfish,
the storm in the Gulf Stream, the Avenger, and that horrible scene
327
of the vessel sinking with its crew . . . ! All these events passed
before my eyes like backdrops unrolling upstage in a theater.
In this strange setting Captain Nemo then grew fantastically.
His features were accentuated, taking on superhuman proportions.
He was no longer my equal, he was the Man of the Waters, the Spirit
of the Seas.
By then it was 9:30. I held my head in both hands to keep it
from bursting. I closed my eyes. I no longer wanted to think.
A half hour still to wait! A half hour of nightmares that could
drive me insane!
Just then I heard indistinct chords from the organ, melancholy harmonies
from some undefinable hymn, actual pleadings from a soul trying
to sever its earthly ties. I listened with all my senses at once,
barely breathing, immersed like Captain Nemo in this musical trance
that was drawing him beyond the bounds of this world.
Then a sudden thought terrified me. Captain Nemo had left his stateroom.
He was in the same lounge I had to cross in order to escape.
There I would encounter him one last time. He would see me,
perhaps speak to me! One gesture from him could obliterate me,
a single word shackle me to his vessel!
Even so, ten o'clock was about to strike. It was time to leave
my stateroom and rejoin my companions.
I dared not hesitate, even if Captain Nemo stood before me.
I opened the door cautiously, but as it swung on its hinges,
it seemed to make a frightful noise. This noise existed, perhaps,
only in my imagination!
I crept forward through the Nautilus's dark gangways, pausing after
each step to curb the pounding of my heart.
I arrived at the corner door of the lounge. I opened it gently.
The lounge was plunged in profound darkness. Chords from the organ
were reverberating faintly. Captain Nemo was there. He didn't see me.
Even in broad daylight I doubt that he would have noticed me,
so completely was he immersed in his trance.
I inched over the carpet, avoiding the tiniest bump whose noise
might give me away. It took me five minutes to reach the door
at the far end, which led into the library.
I was about to open it when a gasp from Captain Nemo nailed
me to the spot. I realized that he was standing up.
I even got a glimpse of him because some rays of light from
the library had filtered into the lounge. He was coming toward me,
arms crossed, silent, not walking but gliding like a ghost.
His chest was heaving, swelling with sobs. And I heard him murmur
these words, the last of his to reach my ears:
"O almighty God! Enough! Enough!"
Was it a vow of repentance that had just escaped from this
man's conscience . . . ?
Frantic, I rushed into the library. I climbed the central companionway,
and going along the upper gangway, I arrived at the skiff.
328
I went through the opening that had already given access to
my two companions.
"Let's go, let's go!" I exclaimed.
"Right away!" the Canadian replied.
First, Ned Land closed and bolted the opening cut into the
Nautilus's sheet iron, using the monkey wrench he had with him.
After likewise closing the opening in the skiff, the Canadian began
to unscrew the nuts still bolting us to the underwater boat.
Suddenly a noise from the ship's interior became audible.
Voices were answering each other hurriedly. What was it?
Had they spotted our escape? I felt Ned Land sliding a dagger
into my hand.
"Yes," I muttered, "we know how to die!"
The Canadian paused in his work. But one word twenty times repeated,
one dreadful word, told me the reason for the agitation spreading
aboard the Nautilus. We weren't the cause of the crew's concern.
"Maelstrom! Maelstrom!" they were shouting.
The Maelstrom! Could a more frightening name have rung
in our ears under more frightening circumstances?
Were we lying in the dangerous waterways off the Norwegian coast?
Was the Nautilus being dragged into this whirlpool just as the skiff
was about to detach from its plating?
As you know, at the turn of the tide, the waters confined between
the Faroe and Lofoten Islands rush out with irresistible violence.
They form a vortex from which no ship has ever been able to escape.
Monstrous waves race together from every point of the horizon.
They form a whirlpool aptly called "the ocean's navel,"
whose attracting power extends a distance of fifteen kilometers.
It can suck down not only ships but whales, and even polar bears
from the northernmost regions.
This was where the Nautilus had been sent accidentally--
or perhaps deliberately--by its captain. It was sweeping around
in a spiral whose radius kept growing smaller and smaller.
The skiff, still attached to the ship's plating, was likewise
carried around at dizzying speed. I could feel us whirling.
I was experiencing that accompanying nausea that follows such
continuous spinning motions. We were in dread, in the last stages
of sheer horror, our blood frozen in our veins, our nerves numb,
drenched in cold sweat as if from the throes of dying!
And what a noise around our frail skiff! What roars echoing from
several miles away! What crashes from the waters breaking against
sharp rocks on the seafloor, where the hardest objects are smashed,
where tree trunks are worn down and worked into "a shaggy fur,"
as Norwegians express it!
What a predicament! We were rocking frightfully. The Nautilus
defended itself like a human being. Its steel muscles were cracking.
Sometimes it stood on end, the three of us along with it!
"We've got to hold on tight," Ned said, "and screw the nuts down again!
329
If we can stay attached to the Nautilus, we can still make it . . . !"
He hadn't finished speaking when a cracking sound occurred.
The nuts gave way, and ripped out of its socket, the skiff was hurled
like a stone from a sling into the midst of the vortex.
My head struck against an iron timber, and with this violent shock
I lost consciousness.
330
CHAPTER 23
Conclusion
WE COME TO the conclusion of this voyage under the seas.
What happened that night, how the skiff escaped from the Maelstrom's
fearsome eddies, how Ned Land, Conseil, and I got out of that whirlpool,
I'm unable to say. But when I regained consciousness, I was lying
in a fisherman's hut on one of the Lofoten Islands. My two companions,
safe and sound, were at my bedside clasping my hands.
We embraced each other heartily.
Just now we can't even dream of returning to France. Travel between upper
Norway and the south is limited. So I have to wait for the arrival
of a steamboat that provides bimonthly service from North Cape.
So it is here, among these gallant people who have taken us in,
that I'm reviewing my narrative of these adventures. It is accurate.
Not a fact has been omitted, not a detail has been exaggerated.
It's the faithful record of this inconceivable expedition into
an element now beyond human reach, but where progress will someday
make great inroads.
Will anyone believe me? I don't know. Ultimately it's unimportant.
What I can now assert is that I've earned the right to speak
of these seas, beneath which in less than ten months, I've cleared
20,000 leagues in this underwater tour of the world that has
shown me so many wonders across the Pacific, the Indian Ocean,
the Red Sea, the Mediterranean, the Atlantic, the southernmost
and northernmost seas!
But what happened to the Nautilus? Did it withstand
the Maelstrom's clutches? Is Captain Nemo alive?
Is he still under the ocean pursuing his frightful program
of revenge, or did he stop after that latest mass execution?
Will the waves someday deliver that manuscript that contains
his full life story? Will I finally learn the man's name?
Will the nationality of the stricken warship tell us the nationality
of Captain Nemo?
I hope so. I likewise hope that his powerful submersible
has defeated the sea inside its most dreadful whirlpool,
that the Nautilus has survived where so many ships have perished!
If this is the case and Captain Nemo still inhabits the ocean--
his adopted country--may the hate be appeased in that fierce heart!
May the contemplation of so many wonders extinguish the spirit of
vengeance in him! May the executioner pass away, and the scientist
continue his peaceful exploration of the seas! If his destiny
is strange, it's also sublime. Haven't I encompassed it myself?
Didn't I lead ten months of this otherworldly existence?
Thus to that question asked 6,000 years ago in the Book
of Ecclesiastes--"Who can fathom the soundless depths?"--
two men out of all humanity have now earned the right to reply.
Captain Nemo and I.
331
END OF THE SECOND PART
End of the Project Gutenberg Etext of 20000 Leagues Under the Seas by
Jules Verne
developed amongst that nation of shipowners, shopkeepers, and mechanics. Mere tradesmen
jumped their counters to become extempore captains, colonels, and generals without having
passed the Military School at West Point; they soon rivalled their colleagues of the old
continent, and, like them, gained victories by dint of lavishing bullets, millions, and men.
But where Americans singularly surpassed Europeans was in the science of ballistics, or of
throwing massive weapons by the use of an engine; not that their arms attained a higher
degree of perfection, but they were of unusual dimensions, and consequently of hitherto
unknown ranges. The English, French, and Prussians have nothing to learn about flank,
running, enfilading, or point-blank firing; but their cannon, howitzers, and mortars are mere
pocket-pistols compared with the formidable engines of American artillery.
This fact ought to astonish no one. The Yankees, the first mechanicians in the world, are born
engineers, just as Italians are musicians and Germans metaphysicians. Thence nothing more
natural than to see them bring their audacious ingenuity to bear on the science of ballistics.
Hence those gigantic cannon, much less useful than sewing-machines, but quite as
astonishing, and much more admired. The marvels of this style by Parrott, Dahlgren, and
Rodman are well known. There was nothing left the Armstrongs, Pallisers, and Treuille de
Beaulieux but to bow before their transatlantic rivals.
Therefore during the terrible struggle between Northerners and Southerners, artillerymen
were in great request; the Union newspapers published their inventions with enthusiasm, and
there was no little tradesman nor naïf ”booby” who did not bother his head day and night
with calculations about impossible trajectory engines.
Now when an American has an idea he seeks another American to share it. If they are three,
they elect a president and two secretaries. Given four, they elect a clerk, and a company is
established. Five convoke a general meeting, and the club is formed. It thus happened at
Baltimore. The first man who invented a new cannon took into partnership the first man who
cast it and the first man that bored it. Such was the nucleus of the Gun Club. One month after
its formation it numbered eighteen hundred and thirty-three effective members, and thirty
thousand five hundred and seventy-five corresponding members.
One condition was imposed as a sine quâ non upon every one who wished to become a
member that of having invented, or at least perfected, a cannon; or, in default of a cannon, a
firearm of some sort. But, to tell the truth, mere inventors of fifteen-barrelled rifles, revolvers,
or sword-pistols did not enjoy much consideration. Artillerymen were always preferred to
them in every circumstance.
“The estimation in which they are held,” said one day a learned orator of the Gun Club, “is in
proportion to the size of their cannon, and in direct ratio to the square of distance attained by
their projectiles!”
A little more and it would have been Newton’s law of gravitation applied to moral order.
Once the Gun Club founded, it can be easily imagined its effect upon the inventive genius of
the Americans. War-engines took colossal proportions, and projectiles launched beyond
permitted distances cut inoffensive pedestrians to pieces. All these inventions left the timid
1
instruments of European artillery far behind them. This may be estimated by the following
figures: 
Formerly, “in the good old times,” a thirty-six pounder, at a distance of three hundred feet,
would cut up thirty-six horses, attacked in flank, and sixty-eight men. The art was then in its
infancy. Projectiles have since made their way. The Rodman gun that sent a projectile
weighing half a ton a distance of seven miles could easily have cut up a hundred and fifty
horses and three hundred men. There was some talk at the Gun Club of making a solemn
experiment with it. But if the horses consented to play their part, the men unfortunately were
wanting.
However that may be, the effect of these cannon was very deadly, and at each discharge the
combatants fell like ears before a scythe. After such projectiles what signified the famous ball
which, at Coutras, in 1587, disabled twenty-five men; and the one which, at Zorndorff, in
1758, killed forty fantassins; and in 1742, Kesseldorf’s Austrian cannon, of which every shot
levelled seventy enemies with the ground? What was the astonishing firing at Jena or
Austerlitz, which decided the fate of the battle? During the Federal war much more
wonderful things had been seen. At the battle of Gettysburg, a conical projectile thrown by a
rifle-barrel cut up a hundred and seventy-three Confederates, and at the passage of the
Potomac a Rodman ball sent two hundred and fifteen Southerners into an evidently better
world. A formidable mortar must also be mentioned, invented by J.T. Maston, a distinguished
member and perpetual secretary of the Gun Club, the result of which was far more deadly,
seeing that, at its trial shot, it killed three hundred and thirty-seven persons by bursting, it is
true.
What can be added to these figures, so eloquent in themselves? Nothing. So the following
calculation obtained by the statistician Pitcairn will be admitted without contestation: by
dividing the number of victims fallen under the projectiles by that of the members of the Gun
Club, he found that each one of them had killed, on his own account, an average of two
thousand three hundred and seventy-five men and a fraction.
By considering such a result it will be seen that the single preoccupation of this learned
society was the destruction of humanity philanthropically, and the perfecting of firearms
considered as instruments of civilisation. It was a company of Exterminating Angels, at
bottom the best fellows in the world.
It must be added that these Yankees, brave as they have ever proved themselves, did not
confine themselves to formulae, but sacrificed themselves to their theories. Amongst them
might be counted officers of every rank, those who had just made their début in the
profession of arms, and those who had grown old on their gun-carriage. Many whose names
figured in the book of honour of the Gun Club remained on the field of battle, and of those
who came back the greater part bore marks of their indisputable valour. Crutches, wooden
legs, articulated arms, hands with hooks, gutta-percha jaws, silver craniums, platinum noses,
nothing was wanting to the collection; and the above-mentioned Pitcairn likewise calculated
that in the Gun Club there was not quite one arm amongst every four persons, and only two
legs amongst six.
But these valiant artillerymen paid little heed to such small matters, and felt justly proud
when the report of a battle stated the number of victims at tenfold the quantity of projectiles
expended.
One day, however, a sad and lamentable day, peace was signed by the survivors of the war,
the noise of firing gradually ceased, the mortars were silent, the howitzers were muzzled for
long enough, and the cannon, with muzzles depressed, were stored in the arsenals, the shots
2
were piled up in the parks, the bloody reminiscences were effaced, cotton shrubs grew
magnificently on the well-manured fields, mourning garments began to be worn-out, as well
as sorrow, and the Gun Club had nothing whatever to do.
Certain old hands, inveterate workers, still went on with their calculations in ballistics; they
still imagined gigantic bombs and unparalleled howitzers. But what was the use of vain
theories that could not be put in practice? So the saloons were deserted, the servants slept in
the antechambers, the newspapers grew mouldy on the tables, from dark corners issued sad
snores, and the members of the Gun Club, formerly so noisy, now reduced to silence by the
disastrous peace, slept the sleep of Platonic artillery!
“This is distressing,” said brave Tom Hunter, whilst his wooden legs were carbonising at the
fireplace of the smoking-room. “Nothing to do! Nothing to look forward to! What a tiresome
existence! Where is the time when cannon awoke you every morning with its joyful reports?”
“That time is over,” answered dandy Bilsby, trying to stretch the arms he had lost. “There
was some fun then! You invented an howitzer, and it was hardly cast before you ran to try it
on the enemy; then you went back to the camp with an encouragement from Sherman, or a
shake of the hands from MacClellan! But now the generals have gone back to their counters,
and instead of cannon-balls they expedite inoffensive cotton bales! Ah, by Saint Barb! the
future of artillery is lost to America!”
“Yes, Bilsby,” cried Colonel Blomsberry, “it is too bad! One fine morning you leave your
tranquil occupations, you are drilled in the use of arms, you leave Baltimore for the battlefield, you conduct yourself like a hero, and in two years, three years at the latest, you are
obliged to leave the fruit of so many fatigues, to go to sleep in deplorable idleness, and keep
your hands in your pockets.”
The valiant colonel would have found it very difficult to give such a proof of his want of
occupation, though it was not the pockets that were wanting.
“And no war in prospect, then,” said the famous J.T. Maston, scratching his gutta-percha
cranium with his steel hook; “there is not a cloud on the horizon now that there is so much to
do in the science of artillery! I myself finished this very morning a diagram with plan, basin,
and elevation of a mortar destined to change the laws of warfare!”
“Indeed!” replied Tom Hunter, thinking involuntarily of the Honourable J.T. Maston’s last
essay.
“Indeed!” answered Maston. “But what is the use of the good results of such studies and so
many difficulties conquered? It is mere waste of time. The people of the New World seem
determined to live in peace, and our bellicose Tribune has gone as far as to predict
approaching catastrophes due to the scandalous increase of population!”
“Yet, Maston,” said Colonel Blomsberry, “they are always fighting in Europe to maintain the
principle of nationalities!”
“What of that?”
“Why, there might be something to do over there, and if they accepted our services ”
“What are you thinking of?” cried Bilsby. “Work at ballistics for the benefit of foreigners!”
“Perhaps that would be better than not doing it at all,” answered the colonel.
“Doubtless,” said J.T. Maston, “it would be better, but such an expedient cannot be thought
of.”
“Why so?” asked the colonel.
3
“Because their ideas of advancement would be contrary to all our American customs. Those
folks seem to think that you cannot be a general-in-chief without having served as second
lieutenant, which comes to the same as saying that no one can point a gun that has not cast
one. Now that is simply ”
“Absurd!” replied Tom Hunter, whittling the arms of his chair with his bowie-knife; “and as
things are so, there is nothing left for us but to plant tobacco or distil whale-oil!”
“What!” shouted J.T. Maston, “shall we not employ these last years of our existence in
perfecting firearms? Will not a fresh opportunity present itself to try the ranges of our
projectiles? Will the atmosphere be no longer illuminated by the lightning of our cannons?
Won’t some international difficulty crop up that will allow us to declare war against some
transatlantic power? Won’t France run down one of our steamers, or won’t England, in
defiance of the rights of nations, hang up three or four of our countrymen?”
“No, Maston,” answered Colonel Blomsberry; “no such luck! No, not one of those incidents
will happen; and if one did, it would be of no use to us. American sensitiveness is declining
daily, and we are going to the dogs!”
“Yes, we are growing quite humble,” replied Bilsby.
“And we are humiliated!” answered Tom Hunter.
“All that is only too true,” replied J.T. Maston, with fresh vehemence. “There are a thousand
reasons for fighting floating about, and still we don’t fight! We economise legs and arms, and
that to the profit of folks that don’t know what to do with them. Look here, without looking
any farther for a motive for war, did not North America formerly belong to the English?”
“Doubtless,” answered Tom Hunter, angrily poking the fire with the end of his crutch.
“Well,” replied J.T. Maston, “why should not England in its turn belong to the Americans?”
“It would be but justice,” answered Colonel Blomsberry.
“Go and propose that to the President of the United States,” cried J.T. Maston, “and see what
sort of a reception you would get.”
“It would not be a bad reception,” murmured Bilsby between the four teeth he had saved
from battle.
“I’faith,” cried J.T. Maston, “they need not count upon my vote in the next elections.”
“Nor upon ours,” answered with common accord these bellicose invalids.
“In the meantime,” continued J.T. Maston, “and to conclude, if they do not furnish me with
the opportunity of trying my new mortar on a real battle-field, I shall send in my resignation
as member of the Gun Club, and I shall go and bury myself in the backwoods of Arkansas.”
“We will follow you there,” answered the interlocutors of the enterprising J.T. Maston.
Things had come to that pass, and the club, getting more excited, was menaced with
approaching dissolution, when an unexpected event came to prevent so regrettable a
catastrophe.
The very day after the foregoing conversation each member of the club received a circular
couched in these terms: 
“Baltimore, October 3rd.
“The president of the Gun Club has the honour to inform his colleagues that at the meeting on
the 5th ultimo he will make them a communication of an extremely interesting nature. He
4
therefore begs that they, to the suspension of all other business, will attend, in accordance
with the present invitation,
“Their devoted colleague,
“IMPEY BARBICANE, P.G.C.”
5
II. President Barbicane’s Communication
On the 5th of October, at 8 p.m., a dense crowd pressed into the saloons of the Gun Club, 21,
Union-square. All the members of the club residing at Baltimore had gone on the invitation of
their president. The express brought corresponding members by hundreds, and if the meetinghall had not been so large, the crowd of savants could not have found room in it; they
overflowed into the neighbouring rooms, down the passages, and even into the courtyards;
there they ran against the populace who were pressing against the doors, each trying to get
into the front rank, all eager to learn the important communication of President Barbicane, all
pressing, squeezing, crushing with that liberty of action peculiar to the masses brought up in
the idea of self-government.
That evening any stranger who might have chanced to be in Baltimore could not have
obtained a place at any price in the large hall; it was exclusively reserved to residing or
corresponding members; no one else was admitted; and the city magnates, common
councillors, and select men were compelled to mingle with their inferiors in order to catch
stray news from the interior.
The immense hall presented a curious spectacle; it was marvellously adapted to the purpose
for which it was built. Lofty pillars formed of cannon, superposed upon huge mortars as a
base, supported the fine ironwork of the arches real cast-iron lacework.
Trophies of blunderbusses, matchlocks, arquebuses, carbines, all sorts of ancient or modern
firearms, were picturesquely enlaced against the walls. The gas, in full flame, came out of a
thousand revolvers grouped in the form of lustres, whilst candlesticks of pistols, and
candelabra made of guns done up in sheaves, completed this display of light. Models of
cannons, specimens of bronze, targets spotted with shot-marks, plaques broken by the shock
of the Gun Club, balls, assortments of rammers and sponges, chaplets of shells, necklaces of
projectiles, garlands of howitzers in a word, all the tools of the artilleryman surprised the
eyes by their wonderful arrangement, and induced a belief that their real purpose was more
ornamental than deadly.
In the place of honour was seen, covered by a splendid glass case, a piece of breech, broken
and twisted under the effort of the powder a precious fragment of J.T. Maston’s cannon.
At the extremity of the hall the president, assisted by four secretaries, occupied a wide
platform. His chair, placed on a carved gun-carriage, was modelled upon the powerful
proportions of a 32-inch mortar; it was pointed at an angle of 90 degs., and hung upon
trunnions so that the president could use it as a rocking-chair, very agreeable in great heat.
Upon the desk, a huge iron plate, supported upon six carronades, stood a very tasteful
inkstand, made of a beautifully-chased Spanish piece, and a report-bell, which, when
required, went off like a revolver. During the vehement discussions this new sort of bell
scarcely sufficed to cover the voices of this legion of excited artillerymen.
In front of the desk, benches, arranged in zigzags, like the circumvallations of intrenchment,
formed a succession of bastions and curtains where the members of the Gun Club took their
seats; and that evening, it may be said, there were plenty on the ramparts. The president was
sufficiently known for all to be assured that he would not have called together his colleagues
without a very great motive.
Impey Barbicane was a man of forty, calm, cold, austere, of a singularly serious and
concentrated mind, as exact as a chronometer, of an imperturbable temperament and
6
immovable character; not very chivalrous, yet adventurous, and always bringing practical
ideas to bear on the wildest enterprises; an essential New-Englander, a Northern colonist, the
descendant of those Roundheads so fatal to the Stuarts, and the implacable enemy of the
Southern gentlemen, the ancient cavaliers of the mother country in a word, a Yankee cast in
a single mould.
Barbicane had made a great fortune as a timber-merchant; named director of artillery during
the war, he showed himself fertile in inventions; enterprising in his ideas, he contributed
powerfully to the progress of ballistics, gave an immense impetus to experimental researches.
He was a person of average height, having, by a rare exception in the Gun Club, all his limbs
intact. His strongly-marked features seemed to be drawn by square and rule, and if it be true
that in order to guess the instincts of a man one must look at his profile, Barbicane seen thus
offered the most certain indications of energy, audacity, and sang-froid.
At that moment he remained motionless in his chair, mute, absorbed, with an inward look
sheltered under his tall hat, a cylinder of black silk, which seems screwed down upon the
skull of American men.
His colleagues talked noisily around him without disturbing him; they questioned one
another, launched into the field of suppositions, examined their president, and tried, but in
vain, to make out the x of his imperturbable physiognomy.
Just as eight o’clock struck from the fulminating clock of the large hall, Barbicane, as if
moved by a spring, jumped up; a general silence ensued, and the orator, in a slightly emphatic
tone, spoke as follows: 
“Brave colleagues, It is some time since an unfruitful peace plunged the members of the
Gun Club into deplorable inactivity. After a period of some years, so full of incidents, we
have been obliged to abandon our works and stop short on the road of progress. I do not fear
to proclaim aloud that any war which would put arms in our hands again would be
welcome ”
“Yes, war!” cried impetuous J.T. Maston.
“Hear, hear!” was heard on every side.
“But war,” said Barbicane, “war is impossible under actual circumstances, and, whatever my
honourable interrupter may hope, long years will elapse before our cannons thunder on a field
of battle. We must, therefore, make up our minds to it, and seek in another order of ideas food
for the activity by which we are devoured.”
The assembly felt that its president was coming to the delicate point; it redoubled its
attention.
“A few months ago, my brave colleagues,” continued Barbicane, “I asked myself if, whilst
still remaining in our speciality, we could not undertake some grand experiment worthy of
the nineteenth century, and if the progress of ballistics would not allow us to execute it with
success. I have therefore sought, worked, calculated, and the conviction has resulted from my
studies that we must succeed in an enterprise that would seem impracticable in any other
country. This project, elaborated at length, will form the subject of my communication; it is
worthy of you, worthy of the Gun Club’s past history, and cannot fail to make a noise in the
world!”
“Much noise?” cried a passionate artilleryman.
“Much noise in the true sense of the word,” answered Barbicane.
7
“Don’t interrupt!” repeated several voices.
“I therefore beg of you, my brave colleagues,” resumed the president, “to grant me all your
attention.”
A shudder ran through the assembly. Barbicane, having with a rapid gesture firmly fixed his
hat on his head, continued his speech in a calm tone: 
“There is not one of you, brave colleagues, who has not seen the moon, or, at least, heard of
It. Do not be astonished if I wish to speak to you about the Queen of Night. It is, perhaps, our
lot to be the Columbuses of this unknown world. Understand me, and second me as much as
you can, I will lead you to its conquest, and its name shall be joined to those of the thirty-six
States that form the grand country of the Union!”
“Hurrah for the moon!” cried the Gun Club with one voice.
“The moon has been much studied,” resumed Barbicane; “its mass, density, weight, volume,
constitution, movements, distance, the part it plays in the solar world, are all perfectly
determined; selenographic maps have been drawn with a perfection that equals, if it does not
surpass, those of terrestrial maps; photography has given to our satellite proofs of
incomparable beauty in a word, all that the sciences of mathematics, astronomy, geology,
and optics can teach is known about the moon; but until now no direct communication with it
has ever been established.”
A violent movement of interest and surprise welcomed this sentence of the orator.
“Allow me,” he resumed, “to recall to you in few words how certain ardent minds, embarked
upon imaginary journeys, pretended to have penetrated the secrets of our satellite. In the
seventeenth century a certain David Fabricius boasted of having seen the inhabitants of the
moon with his own eyes. In 1649 a Frenchman, Jean Baudoin, published his Journey to the
Moon by Dominique Gonzales, Spanish Adventurer. At the same epoch Cyrano de Bergerac
published the celebrated expedition that had so much success in France. Later on, another
Frenchman (that nation took a great deal of notice of the moon), named Fontenelle, wrote
his Plurality of Worlds, a masterpiece of his time; but science in its progress crushes even
masterpieces! About 1835, a pamphlet, translated from the New York American, related that
Sir John Herschel, sent to the Cape of Good Hope, there to make astronomical observations,
had, by means of a telescope, perfected by interior lighting, brought the moon to within a
distance of eighty yards. Then he distinctly perceived caverns in which lived hippopotami,
green mountains with golden borders, sheep with ivory horns, white deer, and inhabitants
with membraneous wings like those of bats. This treatise, the work of an American named
Locke, had a very great success. But it was soon found out that it was a scientific
mystification, and Frenchmen were the first to laugh at it.”
“Laugh at an American!” cried J.T. Maston; “but that’s a casus belli!”
“Be comforted, my worthy friend; before Frenchmen laughed they were completely taken in
by our countryman. To terminate this rapid history, I may add that a certain Hans Pfaal, of
Rotterdam, went up in a balloon filled with a gas made from azote, thirty-seven times lighter
than hydrogen, and reached the moon after a journey of nineteen days. This journey, like the
preceding attempts, was purely imaginary, but it was the work of a popular American writer
of a strange and contemplative genius. I have named Edgar Poe!”
“Hurrah for Edgar Poe!” cried the assembly, electrified by the words of the president.
“I have now come to an end of these attempts which I may call purely literary, and quite
insufficient to establish any serious communications with the Queen of Night. However, I
8
ought to add that some practical minds tried to put themselves into serious communication
with her. Some years ago a German mathematician proposed to send a commission
of savants to the steppes of Siberia. There, on the vast plains, immense geometrical figures
were to be traced by means of luminous reflectors; amongst others, the square of the
hypothenuse, vulgarly called the ‘Ass’s Bridge.’ ‘Any intelligent being,’ said the
mathematician, ‘ought to understand the scientific destination of that figure. The Selenites
(inhabitants of the moon), if they exist, will answer by a similar figure, and, communication
once established, it will be easy to create an alphabet that will allow us to hold converse with
the inhabitants of the moon.’ Thus spoke the German mathematician, but his project was not
put into execution, and until now no direct communication has existed between the earth and
her satellite. But it was reserved to the practical genius of Americans to put itself into
communication with the sidereal world. The means of doing so are simple, easy, certain,
unfailing, and will make the subject of my proposition.”
A hubbub and tempest of exclamations welcomed these words. There was not one of the
audience who was not dominated and carried away by the words of the orator.
“Hear, hear! Silence!” was heard on all sides.
When the agitation was calmed down Barbicane resumed, in a graver tone, his interrupted
speech.
“You know,” said he, “what progress the science of ballistics has made during the last few
years, and to what degree of perfection firearms would have been brought if the war had gone
on. You are not ignorant in general that the power of resistance of cannons and the expansive
force of powder are unlimited. Well, starting from that principle, I asked myself if, by means
of sufficient apparatus, established under determined conditions of resistance, it would not be
possible to send a cannon-ball to the moon!”
At these words an “Oh!” of stupefaction escaped from a thousand panting breasts; then
occurred a moment of silence, like the profound calm that precedes thunder. In fact, the
thunder came, but a thunder of applause, cries, and clamour which made the meeting-hall
shake again. The president tried to speak; he could not. It was only at the end of ten minutes
that he succeeded in making himself heard.
“Let me finish,” he resumed coldly. “I have looked at the question in all its aspects, and from
my indisputable calculations it results that any projectile, hurled at an initial speed of twelve
thousand yards a second, and directed at the moon, must necessarily reach her. I have,
therefore, the honour of proposing to you, my worthy colleagues, the attempting of this little
experiment.”
9
III. Effect Of President Barbicane’s
Communication
It is impossible to depict the effect produced by the last words of the honourable president.
What cries! what vociferations! What a succession of groans, hurrahs, cheers, and all the
onomatopoeia of which the American language is so full. It was an indescribable hubbub and
disorder. Mouths, hands, and feet made as much noise as they could. All the weapons in this
artillery museum going off at once would not have more violently agitated the waves of
sound. That is not surprising; there are cannoneers nearly as noisy as their cannons.
Barbicane remained calm amidst these enthusiastic clamours; perhaps he again wished to
address some words to his colleagues, for his gestures asked for silence, and his fulminating
bell exhausted itself in violent detonations; it was not even heard. He was soon dragged from
his chair, carried in triumph, and from the hands of his faithful comrades he passed into those
of the no less excited crowd.
Nothing can astonish an American. It has often been repeated that the word “impossible” is
not French; the wrong dictionary must have been taken by mistake. In America everything is
easy, everything is simple, and as to mechanical difficulties, they are dead before they are
born. Between the Barbicane project and its realisation not one true Yankee would have
allowed himself to see even the appearance of a difficulty. As soon said as done.
The triumphant march of the president was prolonged during the evening. A veritable
torchlight procession Irish, Germans, Frenchmen, Scotchmen all the heterogeneous
individuals that compose the population of Maryland shouted in their maternal tongue, and
the cheering was unanimous.
Precisely as if she knew it was all about her, the moon shone out then with serene
magnificence, eclipsing other lights with her intense irradiation. All the Yankees directed
their eyes towards the shining disc; some saluted her with their hands, others called her by the
sweetest names; between eight o’clock and midnight an optician in Jones-Fall-street made a
fortune by selling field-glasses. The Queen of Night was looked at through them like a lady
of high life. The Americans acted in regard to her with the freedom of proprietors. It seemed
as if the blonde Phoebe belonged to these enterprising conquerors and already formed part of
the Union territory. And yet the only question was that of sending a projectile a rather
brutal way of entering into communication even with a satellite, but much in vogue amongst
civilised nations.
Midnight had just struck, and the enthusiasm did not diminish; it was kept up in equal doses
in all classes of the population; magistrates, savants, merchants, tradesmen, street-porters,
intelligent as well as “green” men were moved even in their most delicate fibres. It was a
national enterprise; the high town, low town, the quays bathed by the waters of the Patapsco,
the ships, imprisoned in their docks, overflowed with crowds intoxicated with joy, gin, and
whisky; everybody talked, argued, perorated, disputed, approved, and applauded, from the
gentleman comfortably stretched on the bar-room couch before his glass of “sherry-cobbler”
to the waterman who got drunk upon “knock-me-down” in the dark taverns of Fell’s Point.
However, about 2 a.m. the emotion became calmer. President Barbicane succeeded in getting
home almost knocked to pieces. A Hercules could not have resisted such enthusiasm. The
crowd gradually abandoned the squares and streets. The four railroads of Ohio, Susquehanna,
10
Philadelphia, and Washington, which converge at Baltimore, took the heterogeneous
population to the four corners of the United States, and the town reposed in a relative
tranquillity.
It would be an error to believe that during this memorable evening Baltimore alone was
agitated. The large towns of the Union, New York, Boston, Albany, Washington, Richmond,
New Orleans, Charlestown, La Mobile of Texas, Massachusetts, Michigan, and Florida, all
shared in the delirium. The thirty thousand correspondents of the Gun Club were acquainted
with their president’s letter, and awaited with equal impatience the famous communication of
the 5th of October. The same evening as the orator uttered his speech it ran along the
telegraph wires, across the states of the Union, with a speed of 348,447 miles a second. It
may, therefore, be said with absolute certainty that at the same moment the United States of
America, ten times as large as France, cheered with a single voice, and twenty-five millions
of hearts, swollen with pride, beat with the same pulsation.
The next day five hundred daily, weekly, monthly, or bi-monthly newspapers took up the
question; they examined it under its different aspects physical, meteorological, economical,
or moral, from a political or social point of view. They debated whether the moon was a
finished world, or if she was not still undergoing transformation. Did she resemble the earth
in the time when the atmosphere did not yet exist? What kind of spectacle would her hidden
hemisphere present to our terrestrial spheroid? Granting that the question at present was
simply about sending a projectile to the Queen of Night, every one saw in that the startingpoint of a series of experiments; all hoped that one day America would penetrate the last
secrets of the mysterious orb, and some even seemed to fear that her conquest would disturb
the balance of power in Europe.
The project once under discussion, not one of the papers suggested a doubt of its realisation;
all the papers, treatises, bulletins, and magazines published by scientific, literary, or religious
societies enlarged upon its advantages, and the “Natural History Society” of Boston, the
“Science and Art Society” of Albany, the “Geographical and Statistical Society” of New
York, the “American Philosophical Society” of Philadelphia, and the “Smithsonian
Institution” of Washington sent in a thousand letters their congratulations to the Gun Club,
with immediate offers of service and money.
It may be said that no proposition ever had so many adherents; there was no question of
hesitations, doubts, or anxieties. As to the jokes, caricatures, and comic songs that would
have welcomed in Europe, and, above all, in France, the idea of sending a projectile to the
moon, they would have been turned against their author; all the “life-preservers” in the world
would have been powerless to guarantee him against the general indignation. There are things
that are not to be laughed at in the New World.
Impey Barbicane became from that day one of the greatest citizens of the United States,
something like a Washington of science, and one fact amongst several will serve to show the
sudden homage which was paid by a nation to one man.
Some days after the famous meeting of the Gun Club the manager of an English company
announced at the Baltimore Theatre a representation of Much Ado About Nothing, but the
population of the town, seeing in the title a damaging allusion to the projects of President
Barbicane, invaded the theatre, broke the seats, and forced the unfortunate manager to change
the play. Like a sensible man, the manager, bowing to public opinion, replaced the offending
comedy by As You Like It, and for several weeks he had fabulous houses.
11
IV. Answer From The Cambridge Observatory
In the meantime Barbicane did not lose an instant amidst the enthusiasm of which he was the
object. His first care was to call together his colleagues in the board-room of the Gun Club.
There, after a debate, they agreed to consult astronomers about the astronomical part of their
enterprise. Their answer once known, they would then discuss the mechanical means, and
nothing would be neglected to assure the success of their great experiment.
A note in precise terms, containing special questions, was drawn up and addressed to the
observatory of Cambridge in Massachusetts. This town, where the first University of the
United States was founded, is justly celebrated for its astronomical staff. There are assembled
the greatest men of science; there is the powerful telescope which enabled Bond to resolve
the nebula of Andromeda and Clarke to discover the satellite of Sirius. This celebrated
institution was, therefore, worthy in every way of the confidence of the Gun Club.
After two days the answer, impatiently awaited, reached the hands of President Barbicane.
It ran as follows: 
“The Director of the Cambridge Observatory to the President of the Gun Club at Baltimore.
“On the receipt of your favour of the 6th inst., addressed to the Observatory of Cambridge in
the name of the members of the Baltimore Gun Club, we immediately called a meeting of our
staff, who have deemed it expedient to answer as follows: 
“The questions proposed to it were these: 
“‘1. Is it possible to send a projectile to the moon?
“‘2. What is the exact distance that separates the earth and her satellite?
“‘3. What would be the duration of the projectile’s transit to which a sufficient initial speed
had been given, and consequently at what moment should it be hurled so as to reach the moon
at a particular point?
“‘4. At what moment would the moon present the most favourable position for being reached
by the projectile?
“‘5. What point in the heavens ought the cannon, destined to hurl the projectile, be aimed at?
“‘6. What place in the heavens will the moon occupy at the moment when the projectile will
start?’
“Regarding question No. 1, ‘Is it possible to send a projectile to the moon?’
“Yes, it is possible to send a projectile to the moon if it is given an initial velocity of 1,200
yards a second. Calculations prove that this speed is sufficient. In proportion to the distance
from the earth the force of gravitation diminishes in an inverse ratio to the square of the
distance that is to say, that for a distance three times greater that force is nine times less. In
consequence, the weight of the projectile will decrease rapidly, and will end by being
completely annulled at the moment when the attraction of the moon will be equal to that of
the earth that is to say, at the 47/52 of the distance. At that moment the projectile will have
no weight at all, and if it clears that point it will fall on to the moon only by the effect of lunar
gravitation. The theoretic possibility of the experiment is, therefore, quite demonstrated; as to
its success, that depends solely in the power of the engine employed.
12
“Regarding question No. 2, ‘What is the exact distance that separates the earth from her
satellite?’
“The moon does not describe a circle round the earth, but an ellipse, of which our earth
occupies one of the foci; the consequence is, therefore, that at certain times it approaches
nearer to, and at others recedes farther from, the earth, or, in astronomical language, it has its
apogee and its perigee. At its apogee the moon is at 247,552 miles from the earth, and at its
perigee at 218,657 miles only, which makes a difference of 28,895, or more than a ninth of
the distance. The perigee distance is, therefore, the one that should give us the basis of all
calculations.
“Regarding question No. 3, ‘What would be the duration of the projectile’s transit to which a
sufficient initial speed has been given, and consequently at what moment should it be hurled
so as to reach the moon at a particular point?’
“If the projectile kept indefinitely the initial speed of 12,000 yards a second, it would only
take about nine hours to reach its destination; but as that initial velocity will go on
decreasing, it will happen, everything calculated upon, that the projectile will take 300,000
seconds, or 83 hours and 20 minutes, to reach the point where the terrestrial and lunar
gravitations are equal, and from that point it will fall upon the moon in 50,000 seconds, or 13
hours, 53 minutes, and 20 seconds. It must, therefore, be hurled 97 hours, 13 minutes, and 20
seconds before the arrival of the moon at the point aimed at.
“Regarding question No. 4, ‘At what moment would the moon present the most favourable
position for being reached by the projectile?’
“According to what has been said above the epoch of the moon’s perigee must first be
chosen, and at the moment when she will be crossing her zenith, which will still further
diminish the entire distance by a length equal to the terrestrial radius i.e., 3,919 miles;
consequently, the passage to be accomplished will be 214,976 miles. But the moon is not
always at her zenith when she reaches her perigee, which is once a month. She is only under
the two conditions simultaneously at long intervals of time. This coincidence of perigee and
zenith must be waited for. It happens fortunately that on December 4th of next year the moon
will offer these two conditions; at midnight she will be at her perigee and her zenith that is
to say, at her shortest distance from the earth and at her zenith at the same time.
“Regarding question No. 5, ‘At what point in the heavens ought the cannon destined to hurl
the projectile be aimed?’
“The preceding observations being admitted, the cannon ought to be aimed at the zenith of
the place (the zenith is the spot situated vertically above the head of a spectator), so that its
range will be perpendicular to the plane of the horizon, and the projectile will pass the
soonest beyond the range of terrestrial gravitation. But for the moon to reach the zenith of a
place that place must not exceed in latitude the declination of the luminary in other words,
it must be comprised between 0° and 28° of north or south latitude. In any other place the
range must necessarily be oblique, which would seriously affect the success of the
experiment.
“Regarding question No. 6, ‘What place will the moon occupy In the heavens at the moment
of the projectile’s departure?’
“At the moment when the projectile is hurled into space, the moon, which travels forward 13°
10’ 35” each day, will be four times as distant from her zenith point i.e., by 52° 42’ 20”, a
space which corresponds to the distance she will travel during the transit of the projectile. But
as the deviation which the rotatory movement of the earth will impart to the shock must also
13
be taken into account, and as the projectile cannot reach the moon until after a deviation
equal to sixteen radii of the earth, which, calculated upon the moon’s orbit, is equal to about
11°, it is necessary to add these 11° to those caused by the already-mentioned delay of the
moon, or, in round numbers, 64°. Thus, at the moment of firing, the visual radius applied to
the moon will describe with the vertical line of the place an angle of 64°.
“Such are the answers to the questions proposed to the Observatory of Cambridge by the
members of the Gun Club.
“To sum up 
“1st. The cannon must be placed in a country situated between 0° and 28° of north or south
latitude.
“2nd. It must be aimed at the zenith of the place.
“3rd. The projectile must have an initial speed of 12,000 yards a second.
“4th. It must be hurled on December 1st of next year, at 10hrs. 46mins. 40secs. p.m.
“5th. It will meet the moon four days after its departure on December 4th, at midnight
precisely, at the moment she arrives at her zenith.
“The members of the Gun Club ought, therefore, at once to commence the labour necessitated
by such an enterprise, and be ready to put them into execution at the moment fixed upon, for
they will not find the moon in the same conditions of perigee and zenith till eighteen years
and eleven days later.
“The staff of the Observatory of Cambridge puts itself entirely at their disposition for
questions of theoretic astronomy, and begs to join its congratulations to those of the whole of
America.
“On behalf of the staff,
“J.M. BELFAST,
“Director of the Observatory of Cambridge.”
14
V. The Romance Of The Moon
A spectator endowed with infinite power of sight, and placed at the unknown centre round
which gravitates the universe, would have seen myriads of atoms filling all space during the
chaotic epoch of creation. But by degrees, as centuries went on, a change took place; a law of
gravitation manifested itself which the wandering atoms obeyed; these atoms, combined
chemically according to their affinities, formed themselves into molecules, and made those
nebulous masses with which the depths of the heavens are strewed.
These masses were immediately animated by a movement of rotation round their central
point. This centre, made of vague molecules, began to turn on itself whilst progressively
condensing; then, following the immutable laws of mechanics, in proportion as its volume
became diminished by condensation its movement of rotation was accelerated, and these two
effects persisting, there resulted a principal planet, the centre of the nebulous mass.
By watching attentively the spectator would then have seen other molecules in the mass
behave like the central planet, and condense in the same manner by a movement of
progressively-accelerated rotation, and gravitate round it under the form of innumerable stars.
The nebulae, of which astronomers count nearly 5,000 at present, were formed.
Amongst these 5,000 nebulae there is one that men have called the Milky Way, and which
contains eighteen millions of stars, each of which has become the centre of a solar world.
If the spectator had then specially examined amongst these eighteen millions of stars one of
the most modest and least brilliant, a star of the fourth order, the one that proudly named
itself the sun, all the phenomena to which the formation of the universe is due would have
successively taken place under his eyes.
In fact, he would have perceived this sun still in its gaseous state, and composed of mobile
molecules; he would have perceived it turning on its own axis to finish its work of
concentration. This movement, faithful to the laws of mechanics, would have been
accelerated by the diminution of volume, and a time would have come when the centrifugal
force would have overpowered the centripetal, which causes the molecules all to tend towards
the centre.
Then another phenomenon would have passed before the eyes of the spectator, and the
molecules situated in the plane of the equator would have formed several concentric rings
like that of Saturn round the sun. In their turn these rings of cosmic matter, seized with a
movement of rotation round the central mass, would have been broken up into secondary
nebulae that is to say, into planets.
If the spectator had then concentrated all his attention on these planets he would have seen
them behave exactly like the sun and give birth to one or more cosmic rings, origin of those
secondary bodies which we call satellites.
Thus in going up from the atom to the molecule, from the molecule to the nebulae, and from
the nebulae to the principal star, from the principal star to the sun, from the sun to the planet,
and from the planet to the satellite, we have the whole series of transformations undergone by
the celestial powers from the first days of the universe.
The sun seems lost amidst the immensities of the stellar universe, and yet it is related, by
actual theories of science, to the nebula of the Milky Way. Centre of a world, and small as it
appears amidst the ethereal regions, it is still enormous, for its size is 1,400,000 times that of
15
the earth. Around it gravitate eight planets, struck off from its own mass in the first days of
creation. These are, in proceeding from the nearest to the most distant, Mercury, Venus, the
Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune. Between Mars and Jupiter circulate
regularly other smaller bodies, the wandering débris, perhaps, of a star broken up into
thousands of pieces, of which the telescope has discovered eighty-two at present. Some of
these asteroids are so small that they could be walked round in a single day by going at a
gymnastic pace.
Of these attendant bodies which the sun maintains in their elliptical orbit by the great law of
gravitation, some possess satellites of their own. Uranus has eight, Saturn eight, Jupiter four,
Neptune three perhaps, and the Earth one; this latter, one of the least important of the solar
world, is called the Moon, and it is that one that the enterprising genius of the Americans
means to conquer.
The Queen of Night, from her relative proximity and the spectacle rapidly renewed of her
different phases, at first divided the attention of the inhabitants of the earth with the sun; but
the sun tires the eyesight, and the splendour of its light forces its admirers to lower their eyes.
The blonde Phoebe, more humane, graciously allows herself to be seen in her modest grace;
she is gentle to the eye, not ambitious, and yet she sometimes eclipses her brother the radiant
Apollo, without ever being eclipsed by him. The Mahommedans understood what gratitude
they owed to this faithful friend of the earth, and they ruled their months at 29-1/2 days on
her revolution.
The first people of the world dedicated particular worship to this chaste goddess. The
Egyptians called her Isis, the Phoenicians Astarte, the Greeks Phoebe, daughter of Jupiter and
Latona, and they explained her eclipses by the mysterious visits of Diana and the handsome
Endymion. The mythological legend relates that the Nemean lion traversed the country of the
moon before its apparition upon earth, and the poet Agesianax, quoted by Plutarch, celebrated
in his sweet lines its soft eyes, charming nose, and admirable mouth, formed by the luminous
parts of the adorable Selene.
But though the ancients understood the character, temperament, and, in a word, moral
qualities of the moon from a mythological point of view, the most learned amongst them
remained very ignorant of selenography.
Several astronomers, however, of ancient times discovered certain particulars now confirmed
by science. Though the Arcadians pretended they had inhabited the earth at an epoch before
the moon existed, though Simplicius believed her immovable and fastened to the crystal
vault, though Tacitus looked upon her as a fragment broken off from the solar orbit, and
Clearch, the disciple of Aristotle, made of her a polished mirror upon which were reflected
the images of the ocean though, in short, others only saw in her a mass of vapours exhaled
by the earth, or a globe half fire and half ice that turned on itself, other savants, by means of
wise observations and without optical instruments, suspected most of the laws that govern the
Queen of Night.
Thus Thales of Miletus, B.C. 460, gave out the opinion that the moon was lighted up by the
sun. Aristarchus of Samos gave the right explanation of her phases. Cleomenus taught that
she shone by reflected light. Berose the Chaldean discovered that the duration of her
movement of rotation was equal to that of her movement of revolution, and he thus explained
why the moon always presented the same side. Lastly, Hipparchus, 200 years before the
Christian era, discovered some inequalities in the apparent movements of the earth’s satellite.
These different observations were afterwards confirmed, and other astronomers profited by
them. Ptolemy in the second century, and the Arabian Aboul Wefa in the tenth, completed the
16
remarks of Hipparchus on the inequalities that the moon undergoes whilst following the
undulating line of its orbit under the action of the sun. Then Copernicus, in the fifteenth
century, and Tycho Brahe, in the sixteenth, completely exposed the system of the world and
the part that the moon plays amongst the celestial bodies.
At that epoch her movements were pretty well known, but very little of her physical
constitution was known. It was then that Galileo explained the phenomena of light produced
in certain phases by the existence of mountains, to which he gave an average height of 27,000
feet.
After him, Hevelius, an astronomer of Dantzig, lowered the highest altitudes to 15,000 feet;
but his contemporary, Riccioli, brought them up again to 21,000 feet.
Herschel, at the end of the eighteenth century, armed with a powerful telescope, considerably
reduced the preceding measurements. He gave a height of 11,400 feet to the highest
mountains, and brought down the average of different heights to little more than 2,400 feet.
But Herschel was mistaken too, and the observations of Schroeter, Louville, Halley,
Nasmyth, Bianchini, Pastorff, Lohrman, Gruithuysen, and especially the patient studies of
MM. Boeer and Moedler, were necessary to definitely resolve the question. Thanks to
these savants, the elevation of the mountains of the moon is now perfectly known. Boeer and
Moedler measured 1,905 different elevations, of which six exceed 15,000 feet and twentytwo exceed 14,400 feet. Their highest summit towers to a height of 22,606 feet above the
surface of the lunar disc.
At the same time the survey of the moon was being completed; she appeared riddled with
craters, and her essentially volcanic nature was affirmed by each observation. From the
absence of refraction in the rays of the planets occulted by her it is concluded that she can
have no atmosphere. This absence of air entails absence of water; it therefore became
manifest that the Selenites, in order to live under such conditions, must have a special
organisation, and differ singularly from the inhabitants of the earth.
Lastly, thanks to new methods, more perfected instruments searched the moon without
intermission, leaving not a point of her surface unexplored, and yet her diameter measures
2,150 miles; her surface is one-thirteenth of the surface of the globe, and her volume oneforty-ninth of the volume of the terrestrial spheroid; but none of her secrets could escape the
astronomers’ eyes, and these clever savants carried their wonderful observations still further.
Thus they remarked that when the moon was at her full the disc appeared in certain places
striped with white lines, and during her phases striped with black lines. By prosecuting the
study of these with greater precision they succeeded in making out the exact nature of these
lines. They are long and narrow furrows sunk between parallel ridges, bordering generally
upon the edges of the craters; their length varied from ten to one hundred miles, and their
width was about 1,600 yards. Astronomers called them furrows, and that was all they could
do; they could not ascertain whether they were the dried-up beds of ancient rivers or not. The
Americans hope, some day or other, to determine this geological question. They also
undertake to reconnoitre the series of parallel ramparts discovered on the surface of the moon
by Gruithuysen, a learned professor of Munich, who considered them to be a system of
elevated fortifications raised by Selenite engineers. These two still obscure points, and
doubtless many others, can only be definitely settled by direct communication with the moon.
As to the intensity of her light there is nothing more to be learnt; it is 300,000 times weaker
than that of the sun, and its heat has no appreciable action upon thermometers; as to the
phenomenon known as the “ashy light,” it is naturally explained by the effect of the sun’s
17
rays transmitted from the earth to the moon, and which seem to complete the lunar disc when
it presents a crescent form during its first and last phases.
Such was the state of knowledge acquired respecting the earth’s satellite which the Gun Club
undertook to perfect under all its aspects, cosmographical, geographical, geological, political,
and moral.
18
VI. What It Is Impossible To Ignore And What
Is No Longer Allowed To Be Believed In The
United States
The immediate effect of Barbicane’s proposition was that of bringing out all astronomical
facts relative to the Queen of Night. Everybody began to study her assiduously. It seemed as
if the moon had appeared on the horizon for the first time, and that no one had ever seen her
in the sky before. She became the fashion; she was the lion of the day, without appearing less
modest on that account, and took her place amongst the “stars” without being any the
prouder. The newspapers revived old anecdotes in which this “Sun of the wolves” played a
part; they recalled the influence which the ignorance of past ages had ascribed to her; they
sang about her in every tone; a little more and they would have quoted her witty sayings; the
whole of America was filled with selenomania.
The scientific journals treated the question which touched upon the enterprise of the Gun
Club more specially; they published the letter from the Observatory of Cambridge, they
commented upon it and approved of it without reserve.
In short, even the most ignorant Yankee was no longer allowed to be ignorant of a single fact
relative to his satellite, nor, to the oldest women amongst them, to have any superstitions
about her left. Science flooded them; it penetrated into their eyes and ears; it was impossible
to be an ass in astronomy.
Until then many people did not know how the distance between the earth and the moon had
been calculated. This fact was taken advantage of to explain to them that it was done by
measuring the parallax of the moon. If the word “parallax” seemed new to them, they were
told it was the angle formed by two straight lines drawn from either extremity of the earth’s
radius to the moon. If they were in doubt about the perfection of this method, it was
immediately proved to them that not only was the mean distance 234,347 miles, but that
astronomers were right to within seventy miles.
To those who were not familiar with the movements of the moon, the newspapers
demonstrated daily that she possesses two distinct movements, the first being that of rotation
upon her axis, the second that of revolution round the earth, accomplishing both in the same
time that is to say, in 27-1/3 days.
The movement of rotation is the one that causes night and day on the surface of the moon,
only there is but one day and one night in a lunar month, and they each last 354-1/3 hours.
But, happily, the face, turned towards the terrestrial globe, is lighted by it with an intensity
equal to the light of fourteen moons. As to the other face, the one always invisible, it has
naturally 354 hours of absolute night, tempered only by “the pale light that falls from the
stars.” This phenomenon is due solely to the peculiarity that the movements of rotation and
revolution are accomplished in rigorously equal periods, a phenomenon which, according to
Cassini and Herschel, is common to the satellites of Jupiter, and, very probably to the other
satellites.
Some well-disposed but rather unyielding minds did not quite understand at first how, if the
moon invariably shows the same face to the earth during her revolution, she describes one
turn round herself in the same period of time. To such it was answered ”Go into your
dining-room, and turn round the table so as always to keep your face towards the centre;
19
when your circular walk is ended you will have described one circle round yourselves, since
your eye will have successively traversed every point of the room. Well, then, the room is the
heavens, the table is the earth, and you are the moon!”
And they go away delighted with the comparison.
Thus, then, the moon always presents the same face to the earth; still, to be quite exact, it
should be added that in consequence of certain fluctuations from north to south and from
west to east, called libration, she shows rather more than the half of her disc, about 0.57.
When the ignoramuses knew as much as the director of the Cambridge Observatory about the
moon’s movement of rotation they began to make themselves uneasy about her movement of
revolution round the earth, and twenty scientific reviews quickly gave them the information
they wanted. They then learnt that the firmament, with its infinite stars, may be looked upon
as a vast dial upon which the moon moves, indicating the time to all the inhabitants of the
earth; that it is in this movement that the Queen of Night shows herself in her different
phases, that she is full when she is in opposition with the sun that is to say, when the three
bodies are on a line with each other, the earth being in the centre; that the moon is new when
she is in conjunction with the sun that is to say, when she is between the sun and the earth;
lastly, that the moon is in her first or last quarter when she makes, with the sun and the earth,
a right angle of which she occupies the apex.
Some perspicacious Yankees inferred in consequence that eclipses could only take place at
the periods of conjunction or opposition, and their reasoning was just. In conjunction the
moon can eclipse the sun, whilst in opposition it is the earth that can eclipse him in her turn;
and the reason these eclipses do not happen twice in a lunar month is because the plane upon
which the moon moves is elliptical like that of the earth.
As to the height which the Queen of Night can attain above the horizon, the letter from the
Observatory of Cambridge contained all that can be said about it. Every one knew that this
height varies according to the latitude of the place where the observation is taken. But the
only zones of the globe where the moon reaches her zenith that is to say, where she is
directly above the heads of the spectators are necessarily comprised between the 28th
parallels and the equator. Hence the important recommendation given to attempt the
experiment upon some point in this part of the globe, in order that the projectile may be
hurled perpendicularly, and may thus more quickly escape the attraction of gravitation. This
was a condition essential to the success of the enterprise, and public opinion was much
exercised thereupon.
As to the line followed by the moon in her revolution round the earth, the Observatory of
Cambridge had demonstrated to the most ignorant that it is an ellipse of which the earth
occupies one of the foci. These elliptical orbits are common to all the planets as well as to all
the satellites, and rational mechanism rigorously proves that it could not be otherwise. It was
clearly understood that when at her apogee the moon was farthest from the earth, and when at
her perigee she was nearest to our planet.
This, therefore, was what every American knew whether he wished to or no, and what no one
could decently be ignorant of. But if these true principles rapidly made their way, certain
illusive fears and many errors were with difficulty cleared away.
Some worthy people maintained, for instance, that the moon was an ancient comet, which,
whilst travelling along its elongated orbit round the sun, passed near to the earth, and was
retained in her circle of attraction. The drawing-room astronomers pretended to explain thus
the burnt aspect of the moon, a misfortune of which they accused the sun. Only when they
20
were told to notice that comets have an atmosphere, and that the moon has little or none, they
did not know what to answer.
Others belonging to the class of “Shakers” manifested certain fears about the moon; they had
heard that since the observations made in the times of the Caliphs her movement of
revolution had accelerated in a certain proportion; they thence very logically concluded that
an acceleration of movement must correspond to a diminution in the distance between the
two bodies, and that this double effect going on infinitely the moon would one day end by
falling into the earth. However, they were obliged to reassure themselves and cease to fear for
future generations when they were told that according to the calculations of Laplace, an
illustrious French mathematician, this acceleration of movement was restricted within very
narrow limits, and that a proportional diminution will follow it. Thus the equilibrium of the
solar world cannot be disturbed in future centuries.
Lastly there was the superstitious class of ignoramuses to be dealt with; these are not content
with being ignorant; they know what does not exist, and about the moon they know a great
deal. Some of them considered her disc to be a polished mirror by means of which people
might see themselves from different points on the earth, and communicate their thoughts to
one another. Others pretended that out of 1,000 new moons 950 had brought some notable
change, such as cataclysms, revolutions, earthquakes, deluges, &c.; they therefore believed in
the mysterious influence of the Queen of Night on human destinies; they think that every
Selenite is connected by some sympathetic tie with each inhabitant of the earth; they pretend,
with Dr. Mead, that she entirely governs the vital system that boys are born during the new
moon and girls during her last quarter, &c., &c. But at last it became necessary to give up
these vulgar errors, to come back to truth; and if the moon, stripped of her influence, lost her
prestige in the minds of courtesans of every power, if some turned their backs on her, the
immense majority were in her favour. As to the Yankees, they had no other ambition than
that of taking possession of this new continent of the sky, and to plant upon its highest
summit the star-spangled banner of the United States of America.
21
VII. The Hymn Of The Cannon-Ball
The Cambridge Observatory had, in its memorable letter of October 7th, treated the question
from an astronomical point of view the mechanical point had still to be treated. It was then
that the practical difficulties would have seemed insurmountable to any other country but
America; but there they were looked upon as play.
President Barbicane had, without losing any time, nominated a working committee in the
heart of the Gun Club. This committee was in three sittings to elucidate the three great
questions of the cannon, the projectile, and the powder. It was composed of four members
very learned upon these matters. Barbicane had the casting vote, and with him were
associated General Morgan, Major Elphinstone, and, lastly, the inevitable J.T. Maston, to
whom were confided the functions of secretary.
On the 8th of October the committee met at President Barbicane’s house, No. 3, Republicanstreet; as it was important that the stomach should not trouble so important a debate, the four
members of the Gun Club took their seats at a table covered with sandwiches and teapots.
J.T. Maston immediately screwed his pen on to his steel hook and the business began.
Barbicane opened the meeting as follows: 
“Dear colleagues,” said he, “we have to solve one of the more important problems in
ballistics that greatest of sciences which treats of the movement of projectiles that is to
say, of bodies hurled into space by some power of impulsion and then left to themselves.”
“Oh, ballistics, ballistics!” cried J.T. Maston in a voice of emotion.
“Perhaps,” continued Barbicane, “the most logical thing would be to consecrate this first
meeting to discussing the engine.”
“Certainly,” answered General Morgan.
“Nevertheless,” continued Barbicane, “after mature deliberation, it seems to me that the
question of the projectile ought to precede that of the cannon, and that the dimensions of the
latter ought to depend upon the dimensions of the former.”
J.T. Maston here interrupted the president, and was heard with the attention which his
magnificent past career deserved.
“My dear friends,” said he in an inspired tone, “our president is right to give the question of
the projectile the precedence of every other; the cannon-ball we mean to hurl at the moon will
be our messenger, our ambassador, and I ask your permission to regard it from an entirely
moral point of view.”
This new way of looking at a projectile excited the curiosity of the members of the
committee; they therefore listened attentively to the words of J.T. Maston.
“My dear colleagues,” he continued, “I will be brief. I will lay aside the material projectile 
the projectile that kills in order to take up the mathematical projectile the moral projectile.
A cannon-ball is to me the most brilliant manifestation of human power, and by creating it
man has approached nearest to the Creator!”
“Hear, hear!” said Major Elphinstone.
“In fact,” cried the orator, “if God has made the stars and the planets, man has made the
cannon-ball that criterion of terrestrial speed that reduction of bodies wandering in space
22
which are really nothing but projectiles. Let Providence claim the speed of electricity, light,
the stars, comets, planets, satellites, sound, and wind! But ours is the speed of the cannonball a hundred times greater than that of trains and the fastest horses!”
J.T. Maston was inspired; his accents became quite lyrical as he chanted the hymn
consecrated to the projectile.
“Would you like figures?” continued he; “here are eloquent ones. Take the simple 24
pounder; though it moves 80,000 times slower than electricity, 64,000 times slower than
light, 76 times slower than the earth in her movement of translation round the sun, yet when it
leaves the cannon it goes quicker than sound; it goes at the rate of 14 miles a minute, 840
miles an hour, 20,100 miles a day that is to say, at the speed of the points of the equator in
the globe’s movement of rotation, 7,336,500 miles a year. It would therefore take 11 days to
get to the moon, 12 years to get to the sun, 360 years to reach Neptune, at the limits of the
solar world. That is what this modest cannon-ball, the work of our hands, can do! What will it
be, therefore, when, with twenty times that speed, we shall hurl it with a rapidity of seven
miles a second? Ah! splendid shot! superb projectile! I like to think you will be received up
there with the honours due to a terrestrial ambassador!”
Cheers greeted this brilliant peroration, and J.T. Maston, overcome with emotion, sat down
amidst the felicitations of his colleagues.
“And now,” said Barbicane, “that we have given some time to poetry, let us proceed to facts.”
“We are ready,” answered the members of the committee as they each demolished half-adozen sandwiches.
“You know what problem it is we have to solve,” continued the president; “it is that of
endowing a projectile with a speed of 12,000 yards per second. I have every reason to believe
that we shall succeed, but at present let us see what speeds we have already obtained; General
Morgan can edify us upon that subject.”
“So much the more easily,” answered the general, “because during the war I was a member of
the Experiment Commission. The 100-pound cannon of Dahlgren, with a range of 5,000
yards, gave their projectiles an initial speed of 500 yards a second.”
“Yes; and the Rodman Columbiad?” (the Americans gave the name of “Columbiad” to their
enormous engines of destruction) asked the president.
“The Rodman Columbiad, tried at Fort Hamilton, near New York, hurled a projectile,
weighing half a ton, a distance of six miles, with a speed of 800 yards a second, a result
which neither Armstrong nor Palliser has obtained in England.”
“Englishmen are nowhere!” said J.T. Maston, pointing his formidable steel hook eastward.
“Then,” resumed Barbicane, “a speed of 800 yards is the maximum obtained at present.”
“Yes,” answered Morgan.
“I might add, however,” replied J.T. Maston, “that if my mortar had not been blown up ”
“Yes, but it was blown up,” replied Barbicane with a benevolent gesture. “We must take the
speed of 800 yards for a starting point. We must keep till another meeting the discussion of
the means used to produce this speed; allow me to call your attention to the dimensions which
our projectile must have. Of course it must be something very different to one of half a ton
weight.”
“Why?” asked the major.
23
“Because,” quickly answered J.T. Maston, “it must be large enough to attract the attention of
the inhabitants of the moon, supposing there are any.”
“Yes,” answered Barbicane, “and for another reason still more important.”
“What do you mean, Barbicane?” asked the major.
“I mean that it is not enough to send up a projectile and then to think no more about it; we
must follow it in its transit.”
“What?” said the general, slightly surprised at the proposition.
“Certainly,” replied Barbicane, like a man who knew what he was saying, “or our experiment
will be without result.”
“But then,” replied the major, “you will have to give the projectile enormous dimensions.”
“No. Please grant me your attention. You know that optical instruments have acquired great
perfection; certain telescopes increase objects six thousand, and bring the moon to within a
distance of forty miles. Now at that distance objects sixty feet square are perfectly visible.
The power of penetration of the telescope has not been increased, because that power is only
exercised to the detriment of their clearness, and the moon, which is only a reflecting mirror,
does not send a light intense enough for the telescopes to increase objects beyond that limit.”
“Very well, then, what do you mean to do?” asked the general. “Do you intend giving a
diameter of sixty feet to your projectile?”
“No.”
“You are not going to take upon yourself the task of making the moon more luminous?”
“I am, though.”
“That’s rather strong!” exclaimed Maston.
“Yes, but simple,” answered Barbicane. “If I succeed in lessening the density of the
atmosphere which the moon’s light traverses, shall I not render that light more intense?”
“Evidently.”
“In order to obtain that result I shall only have to establish my telescope upon some high
mountain. We can do that.”
“I give in,” answered the major; “you have such a way of simplifying things! What
enlargement do you hope to obtain thus?”
“One of 48,000 times, which will bring the moon within five miles only, and objects will
only need a diameter of nine feet.”
“Perfect!” exclaimed J.T. Maston; “then our projectile will have a diameter of nine feet?”
“Precisely.”
“Allow me to inform you, however,” returned Major Elphinstone, “that its weight will still
be ”
“Oh, major!” answered Barbicane, “before discussing its weight allow me to tell you that our
forefathers did marvels in that way. Far be it from me to pretend that ballistics have not
progressed, but it is well to know that in the Middle Ages surprising results were obtained, I
dare affirm, even more surprising than ours.”
“Justify your statement,” exclaimed J.T. Maston.
24
“Nothing is easier,” answered Barbicane; “I can give you some examples. At the siege of
Constantinople by Mahomet II., in 1453, they hurled stone bullets that weighed 1,900 lbs.; at
Malta, in the time of its knights, a certain cannon of Fort Saint Elme hurled projectiles
weighing 2,500 lbs. According to a French historian, under Louis XI. a mortar hurled a bomb
of 500 lbs. only; but that bomb, fired at the Bastille, a place where mad men imprisoned wise
ones, fell at Charenton, where wise men imprison mad ones.”
“Very well,” said J.T. Maston.
“Since, what have we seen, after all? The Armstrong cannons hurl projectiles of 500 lbs., and
the Rodman Columbiads projectiles of half a ton! It seems, then, that if projectiles have
increased in range they have lost in weight. Now, if we turn our efforts in that direction, we
must succeed with the progress of the science in doubling the weight of the projectiles of
Mahomet II. and the Knights of Malta.”
“That is evident,” answered the major; “but what metal do you intend to employ for your own
projectile?”
“Simply cast-iron,” said General Morgan.
“Cast-iron!” exclaimed J.T. Maston disdainfully, “that’s very common for a bullet destined to
go to the moon.”
“Do not let us exaggerate, my honourable friend,” answered Morgan; “cast-iron will be
sufficient.”
“Then,” replied Major Elphinstone, “as the weight of the projectile is in proportion to its
volume, a cast-iron bullet, measuring nine feet in diameter, will still be frightfully heavy.”
“Yes, if it be solid, but not if it be hollow,” said Barbicane.
“Hollow! then it will be an obus?”
“In which we can put despatches,” replied J.T. Maston, “and specimens of our terrestrial
productions.”
“Yes, an obus,” answered Barbicane; “that is what it must be; a solid bullet of 108 inches
would weigh more than 200,000 lbs., a weight evidently too great; however, as it is necessary
to give the projectile a certain stability, I propose to give it a weight of 20,000 lbs.”
“What will be the thickness of the metal?” asked the major.
“If we follow the usual proportions,” replied Morgan, “a diameter of 800 inches demands
sides two feet thick at least.”
“That would be much too thick,” answered Barbicane; “we do not want a projectile to pierce
armour-plate; it only needs sides strong enough to resist the pressure of the powder-gas. This,
therefore, is the problem: What thickness ought an iron obus to have in order to weigh only
20,000 lbs.? Our clever calculator, Mr. Maston, will tell us at once.”
“Nothing is easier,” replied the honourable secretary.
So saying, he traced some algebraical signs on the paper, amongst which n^2 and x^2
frequently appeared. He even seemed to extract from them a certain cubic root, and said 
“The sides must be hardly two inches thick.”
“Will that be sufficient?” asked the major doubtfully.
“No,” answered the president, “certainly not.”
25
“Then what must be done?” resumed Elphinstone, looking puzzled.
“We must use another metal instead of cast-iron.”
“Brass?” suggested Morgan.
“No; that is too heavy too, and I have something better than that to propose.”
“What?” asked the major.
“Aluminium,” answered Barbicane.
“Aluminium!” cried all the three colleagues of the president.
“Certainly, my friends. You know that an illustrious French chemist, Henry St. Claire
Deville, succeeded in 1854 in obtaining aluminium in a compact mass. This precious metal
possesses the whiteness of silver, the indestructibility of gold, the tenacity of iron, the
fusibility of copper, the lightness of glass; it is easily wrought, and is very widely distributed
in nature, as aluminium forms the basis of most rocks; it is three times lighter than iron, and
seems to have been created expressly to furnish us with the material for our projectile!”
“Hurrah for aluminium!” cried the secretary, always very noisy in his moments of
enthusiasm.
“But, my dear president,” said the major, “is not aluminium quoted exceedingly high?”
“It was so,” answered Barbicane; “when first discovered a pound of aluminium cost 260 to
280 dollars; then it fell to twenty-seven dollars, and now it is worth nine dollars.”
“But nine dollars a pound,” replied the major, who did not easily give in; “that is still an
enormous price.”
“Doubtless, my dear major; but not out of reach.”
“What will the projectile weigh, then?” asked Morgan.
“Here is the result of my calculations,” answered Barbicane. “A projectile of 108 inches in
diameter and 12 inches thick would weigh, if it were made of cast-iron, 67,440 lbs.; cast in
aluminium it would be reduced to 19,250 lbs.”
“Perfect!” cried Maston; “that suits our programme capitally.”
“Yes,” replied the major; “but do you not know that at nine dollars a pound the projectile
would cost ”
“One hundred seventy-three thousand and fifty dollars. Yes, I know that; but fear nothing, my
friends; money for our enterprise will not be wanting, I answer for that.”
“It will be showered upon us,” replied J.T. Maston.
“Well, what do you say to aluminium?” asked the president.
“Adopted,” answered the three members of the committee.
“As to the form of the projectile,” resumed Barbicane, “it is of little consequence, since, once
the atmosphere cleared, it will find itself in empty space; I therefore propose a round ball,
which will turn on itself, if it so pleases.”
Thus ended the first committee meeting. The question of the projectile was definitely
resolved upon, and J.T. Maston was delighted with the idea of sending an aluminium bullet to
the Selenites, “as it will give them no end of an idea of the inhabitants of the earth!”
26
VIII. History Of The Cannon
The resolutions passed at this meeting produced a great effect outside. Some timid people
grew alarmed at the idea of a projectile weighing 20,000 lbs. hurled into space. People asked
what cannon could ever transmit an initial speed sufficient for such a mass. The report of the
second meeting was destined to answer these questions victoriously.
The next evening the four members of the Gun Club sat down before fresh mountains of
sandwiches and a veritable ocean of tea. The debate then began.
“My dear colleagues,” said Barbicane, “we are going to occupy ourselves with the
construction of the engine, its length, form, composition, and weight. It is probable that we
shall have to give it gigantic dimensions, but, however great our difficulties might be, our
industrial genius will easily overcome them. Will you please listen to me and spare objections
for the present? I do not fear them.”
An approving murmur greeted this declaration.
“We must not forget,” resumed Barbicane, “to what point our yesterday’s debate brought us;
the problem is now the following: how to give an initial speed of 12,000 yards a second to a
shot 108 inches in diameter weighing 20,000 lbs.
“That is the problem indeed,” answered Major Elphinstone.
“When a projectile is hurled into space,” resumed Barbicane, “what happens? It is acted upon
by three independent forces, the resistance of the medium, the attraction of the earth, and the
force of impulsion with which it is animated. Let us examine these three forces. The
resistance of the medium that is to say, the resistance of the air is of little importance. In
fact, the terrestrial atmosphere is only forty miles deep. With a rapidity of 12,000 yards the
projectile will cross that in five seconds, and this time will be short enough to make the
resistance of the medium insignificant. Let us now pass to the attraction of the earth that is
to say, to the weight of the projectile. We know that that weight diminishes in an inverse ratio
to the square of distances in fact, this is what physics teach us: when a body left to itself
falls on the surface of the earth, it falls 15 feet in the first second, and if the same body had to
fall 257,542 miles that is to say, the distance between the earth and the moon its fall
would be reduced to half a line in the first second. That is almost equivalent to immobility.
The question is, therefore, how progressively to overcome this law of gravitation. How shall
we do it? By the force of impulsion?”
“That is the difficulty,” answered the major.
“That is it indeed,” replied the president. “But we shall triumph over it, for this force of
impulsion we want depends on the length of the engine and the quantity of powder employed,
the one only being limited by the resistance of the other. Let us occupy ourselves, therefore,
to-day with the dimensions to be given to the cannon. It is quite understood that we can make
it, as large as we like, seeing it will not have to be moved.”
“All that is evident,” replied the general.
“Until now,” said Barbicane, “the longest cannon, our enormous Columbiads, have not been
more than twenty-five feet long; we shall therefore astonish many people by the dimensions
we shall have to adopt.”
27
“Certainly,” exclaimed J.T. Maston. “For my part, I ask for a cannon half a mile long at
least!”
“Half a mile!” cried the major and the general.
“Yes, half a mile, and that will be half too short.”
“Come, Maston,” answered Morgan, “you exaggerate.”
“No, I do not,” said the irate secretary; “and I really do not know why you tax me with
exaggeration.”
“Because you go too far.”
“You must know, sir,” answered J.T. Maston, looking dignified, “that an artilleryman is like a
cannon-ball, he can never go too far.”
The debate was getting personal, but the president interfered.
“Be calm, my friends, and let us reason it out. We evidently want a gun of great range, as the
length of the engine will increase the detention of gas accumulated behind the projectile, but
it is useless to overstep certain limits.”
“Perfectly,” said the major.
“What are the usual rules in such a case? Ordinarily the length of a cannon is twenty or
twenty-five times the diameter of the projectile, and it weighs 235 to 240 times its weight.”
“It is not enough,” cried J.T. Maston with impetuosity.
“I agree to that, my worthy friend, and in fact by keeping that proportion for a projectile nine
feet wide, weighing 30,000 lbs., the engine would only have a length of 225 feet and a weight
of 7,200,000 lbs.”
“That is ridiculous,” resumed J.T. Maston. “You might as well take a pistol.”
“I think so too,” answered Barbicane; “that is why I propose to quadruple that length, and to
construct a cannon 900 feet long.”
The general and the major made some objections, but, nevertheless, this proposition, strongly
supported by the secretary, was definitely adopted.
“Now,” said Elphinstone, “what thickness must we give its sides?”
“A thickness of six feet,” answered Barbicane.
“You do not think of raising such a mass upon a gun-carriage?” asked the major.
“That would be superb, however! said J.T. Maston.
“But impracticable,” answered Barbicane. “No, I think of casting this engine in the ground
itself, binding it up with wrought-iron hoops, and then surrounding it with a thick mass of
stone and cement masonry. When it is cast it must be bored with great precision so as to
prevent windage, so there will be no loss of gas, and all the expansive force of the powder
will be employed in the propulsion.”
“Hurrah! hurrah!” said Maston, “we have our cannon.”
“Not yet,” answered Barbicane, calming his impatient friend with his hand.
“Why not?”
“Because we have not discussed its form. Shall it be a cannon, howitzer, or a mortar?”
28
“A cannon,” replied Morgan.
“A howitzer,” said the major.
“A mortar,” exclaimed J.T. Maston.
A fresh discussion was pending, each taking the part of his favourite weapon, when the
president stopped it short.
“My friends,” said he, “I will soon make you agree. Our Columbiad will be a mixture of all
three. It will be a cannon, because the powder-magazine will have the same diameter as the
chamber. It will be a howitzer, because it will hurl an obus. Lastly, it will be a mortar,
because it will be pointed at an angle of 90°, and that without any chance of recoil;
unalterably fixed to the ground, it will communicate to the projectile all the power of
impulsion accumulated in its body.”
“Adopted, adopted,” answered the members of the committee.
“One question,” said Elphinstone, “and will this canobusomortar be rifled?”
“No,” answered Barbicane. “No, we must have an enormous initial speed, and you know very
well that a shot leaves a rifle less rapidly than a smooth-bore.”
“True,” answered the major.
“Well, we have it this time,” repeated J.T. Maston.
“Not quite yet,” replied the president.
“Why not?”
“Because we do not yet know of what metal it will be made.”
“Let us decide that without delay.”
“I was going to propose it to you.”
The four members of the committee each swallowed a dozen sandwiches, followed by a cup
of tea, and the debate recommenced.
“Our cannon,” said Barbicane, “must be possessed of great tenacity, great hardness; it must
be infusible by heat, indissoluble, and inoxydable by the corrosive action of acids.”
“There is no doubt about that,” answered the major, “and as we shall have to employ a
considerable quantity of metal we shall not have much choice.”
“Well, then,” said Morgan, “I propose for the fabrication of the Columbiad the best alloy
hitherto known that is to say, 100 parts of copper, 12 of tin, and 6 of brass.”
“My friends,” answered the president, “I agree that this composition has given excellent
results; but in bulk it would be too dear and very hard to work. I therefore think we must
adopt an excellent material, but cheap, such as cast-iron. Is not that your opinion, major?”
“Quite,” answered Elphinstone.
“In fact,” resumed Barbicane, “cast-iron costs ten times less than bronze; it is easily melted, it
is readily run into sand moulds, and is rapidly manipulated; it is, therefore, an economy of
money and time. Besides, that material is excellent, and I remember that during the war at the
siege of Atlanta cast-iron cannon fired a thousand shots each every twenty minutes without
being damaged by it.”
“Yet cast-iron is very brittle,” answered Morgan.
29
“Yes, but it possesses resistance too. Besides, we shall not let it explode, I can answer for
that.”
“It is possible to explode and yet be honest,” replied J.T. Maston sententiously.
“Evidently,” answered Barbicane. “I am, therefore, going to beg our worthy secretary to
calculate the weight of a cast-iron cannon 900 feet long, with an inner diameter of nine feet,
and sides six feet thick.”
“At once,” answered J.T. Maston, and, as he had done the day before, he made his
calculations with marvellous facility, and said at the end of a minute 
“This cannon will weigh 68,040 tons.”
“And how much will that cost at two cents a pound?”
“Two million five hundred and ten thousand seven hundred and one dollars.”
J.T. Maston, the major, and the general looked at Barbicane anxiously.
“Well, gentlemen,” said the president, “I can only repeat what I said to you yesterday, don’t
be uneasy; we shall not want for money.”
Upon this assurance of its president the committee broke up, after having fixed a third
meeting for the next evening.
30
IX. The Question Of Powders
The question of powder still remained to be settled. The public awaited this last decision with
anxiety. The size of the projectile and length of the cannon being given, what would be the
quantity of powder necessary to produce the impulsion? This terrible agent, of which,
however, man has made himself master, was destined to play a part in unusual proportions.
It is generally known and often asserted that gunpowder was invented in the fourteenth
century by the monk Schwartz, who paid for his great discovery with his life. But it is nearly
proved now that this story must be ranked among the legends of the Middle Ages.
Gunpowder was invented by no one; it is a direct product of Greek fire, composed, like it, of
sulphur and saltpetre; only since that epoch these mixtures; which were only dissolving, have
been transformed into detonating mixtures.
But if learned men know perfectly the false history of gunpowder, few people are aware of its
mechanical power. Now this is necessary to be known in order to understand the importance
of the question submitted to the committee.
Thus a litre of gunpowder weighs about 2 lbs.; it produces, by burning, about 400 litres of
gas; this gas, liberated, and under the action of a temperature of 2,400°, occupies the space of
4,000 litres. Therefore the volume of powder is to the volume of gas produced by its
deflagration as 1 to 400. The frightful force of this gas, when it is compressed into a space
4,000 times too small, may be imagined.
This is what the members of the committee knew perfectly when, the next day, they began
their sitting. Major Elphinstone opened the debate.
“My dear comrades,” said the distinguished chemist, “I am going to begin with some
unexceptionable figures, which will serve as a basis for our calculation. The 24-lb. cannonball, of which the Hon. J.T. Maston spoke the day before yesterday, is driven out of the
cannon by 16 lbs. of powder only.”
“You are certain of your figures?” asked Barbicane.
“Absolutely certain,” answered the major. “The Armstrong cannon only uses 75 lbs. of
powder for a projectile of 800 lbs., and the Rodman Columbiad only expends 160 lbs. of
powder to send its half-ton bullet six miles. These facts cannot be doubted, for I found them
myself in the reports of the Committee of Artillery.”
“That is certain,” answered the general.
“Well,” resumed the major, “the conclusion to be drawn from these figures is that the
quantity of powder does not augment with the weight of the shot; in fact, if a shot of 24 lbs.
took 16 lbs. of powder, and, in other terms, if in ordinary cannons a quantity of powder
weighing two-thirds of the weight of the projectile is used, this proportion is not always
necessary. Calculate, and you will see that for the shot of half a ton weight, instead of 333
lbs. of powder, this quantity has been reduced to 116 lbs. only.
“What are you driving at?” asked the president.
“The extreme of your theory, my dear major,” said J.T. Maston, “would bring you to having
no powder at all, provided your shot were sufficiently heavy.”
“Friend Maston will have his joke even in the most serious things,” replied the major; “but he
need not be uneasy; I shall soon propose a quantity of powder that will satisfy him. Only I
31
wish to have it understood that during the war, and for the largest guns, the weight of the
powder was reduced, after experience, to a tenth of the weight of the shot.”
“Nothing is more exact,” said Morgan; “but, before deciding the quantity of powder
necessary to give the impulsion, I think it would be well to agree upon its nature.”
“We shall use a large-grained powder,” answered the major; “its deflagration is the most
rapid.”
“No doubt,” replied Morgan; “but it is very brittle, and ends by damaging the chamber of the
gun.”
“Certainly; but what would be bad for a gun destined for long service would not be so for our
Columbiad. We run no danger of explosion, and the powder must immediately take fire to
make its mechanical effect complete.”
“We might make several touchholes,” said J.T. Maston, “so as to set fire to it in several
places at the same time.”
“No doubt,” answered Elphinstone, “but that would make the working of it more difficult. I
therefore come back to my large-grained powder that removes these difficulties.”
“So be it,” answered the general.
“To load his Columbiad,” resumed the major, “Rodman used a powder in grains as large as
chestnuts, made of willow charcoal, simply rarefied in cast-iron pans. This powder was hard
and shining, left no stain on the hands, contained a great proportion of hydrogen and oxygen,
deflagrated instantaneously, and, though very brittle, did not much damage the mouthpiece.”
“Well, it seems to me,” answered J.T. Maston, “that we have nothing to hesitate about, and
that our choice is made.”
“Unless you prefer gold-powder,” replied the major, laughing, which provoked a threatening
gesture from the steel hook of his susceptible friend.
Until then Barbicane had kept himself aloof from the discussion; he listened, and had
evidently an idea. He contented himself with saying simply 
“Now, my friends, what quantity of powder do you propose?”
The three members of the Gun Club looked at one another for the space of a minute.
“Two hundred thousand pounds,” said Morgan at last.
“Five hundred thousand,” replied the major.
“Eight hundred thousand,” exclaimed J.T. Maston.
This, time Elphinstone dared not tax his colleague with exaggeration. In fact, the question
was that of sending to the moon a projectile weighing 20,000 lbs., and of giving it an initial
force of 2000 yards a second. A moment of silence, therefore, followed the triple proposition
made by the three colleagues.
It was at last broken by President Barbicane.
“My brave comrades,” said he in a quiet tone, “I start from this principle, that the resistance
of our cannon, in the given conditions, is unlimited. I shall, therefore, surprise the
Honourable J.T. Maston when I tell him that he has been timid in his calculations, and I
propose to double his 800,000 lbs. of powder.”
“Sixteen hundred thousand pounds!” shouted J.T. Maston, jumping out of his chair.
32
“Quite as much as that.”
“Then we shall have to come back to my cannon half a mile long.”
“It is evident,” said the major.
“Sixteen hundred thousand pounds of powder,” resumed the Secretary of Committee, “will
occupy about a space of 22,000 cubic feet; now, as your cannon will only hold about 54,000
cubic feet, it will be half full, and the chamber will not be long enough to allow the explosion
of the gas to give sufficient impulsion to your projectile.”
There was nothing to answer. J.T. Maston spoke the truth. They all looked at Barbicane.
“However,” resumed the president, “I hold to that quantity of powder. Think! 1,600,000
pounds of powder will give 6,000,000,000 litres of gas.”
“Then how is it to be done?” asked the general.
“It is very simple. We must reduce this enormous quantity of powder, keeping at the same
time its mechanical power.”
“Good! By what means?”
“I will tell you,” answered Barbicane simply.
His interlocutors all looked at him.
“Nothing is easier, in fact,” he resumed, “than to bring that mass of powder to a volume four
times less. You all know that curious cellular matter which constitutes the elementary tissues
of vegetables?”
“Ah!” said the major, “I understand you, Barbicane.”
“This matter,” said the president, “is obtained in perfect purity in different things, especially
in cotton, which is nothing but the skin of the seeds of the cotton plant. Now cotton,
combined with cold nitric acid, is transformed into a substance eminently insoluble,
eminently combustible, eminently explosive. Some years ago, in 1832, a French chemist,
Braconnot, discovered this substance, which he called xyloidine. In 1838, another
Frenchman, Pelouze, studied its different properties; and lastly, in 1846, Schonbein, professor
of chemistry at Basle, proposed it as gunpowder. This powder is nitric cotton.”
“Or pyroxyle,” answered Elphinstone.
“Or fulminating cotton,” replied Morgan.
“Is there not an American name to put at the bottom of this discovery?” exclaimed J.T.
Maston, animated by a lively sentiment of patriotism.
“Not one, unfortunately,” replied the major.
“Nevertheless, to satisfy Maston,” resumed the president, “I may tell him that one of our
fellow-citizens may be annexed to the study of the celluosity, for collodion, which is one of
the principal agents in photography, is simply pyroxyle dissolved in ether to which alcohol
has been added, and it was discovered by Maynard, then a medical student.”
“Hurrah for Maynard and fulminating cotton!” cried the noisy secretary of the Gun Club.
“I return to pyroxyle,” resumed Barbicane. “You are acquainted with its properties which
make it so precious to us. It is prepared with the greatest facility; cotton plunged in smoking
nitric acid for fifteen minutes, then washed in water, then dried, and that is all.”
“Nothing is more simple, certainty,” said Morgan.
33
“What is more, pyroxyle is not damaged by moisture, a precious quality in our eyes, as it will
take several days to load the cannon. Its inflammability takes place at 170° instead of at 240°
and its deflagration is so immediate that it may be fired on ordinary gunpowder before the
latter has time to catch fire too.”
“Perfect,” answered the major.
“Only it will cost more.”
“What does that matter?” said J.T. Maston.
“Lastly, it communicates to projectiles a speed four times greater than that of gunpowder. I
may even add that if 8/10ths of its weight of nitrate of potash is added its expansive force is
still greatly augmented.”
“Will that be necessary?” asked the major.
“I do not think so,” answered Barbicane. “Thus instead of 1,600,000 lbs. of powder, we shall
only have 400,000 lbs. of fulminating cotton, and as we can, without danger, compress 500
lbs. of cotton into 27 cubic feet, that quantity will not take up more than 180 feet in the
chamber of the Columbiad. By these means the projectile will have more than 700 feet of
chamber to traverse under a force of 6,000,000,000 of litres of gas before taking its flight
over the Queen of Night.”
Here J.T. Maston could not contain his emotion. He threw himself into the arms of his friend
with the violence of a projectile, and he would have been stove in had he not have been
bombproof.
This incident ended the first sitting of the committee. Barbicane and his enterprising
colleagues, to whom nothing seemed impossible, had just solved the complex question of the
projectile, cannon, and powder. Their plan being made, there was nothing left but to put it
into execution.
34
X. One Enemy Against Twenty-Five Millions
Of Friends
The American public took great interest in the least details of the Gun Club’s enterprise. It
followed the committee debates day by day. The most simple preparations for this great
experiment, the questions of figures it provoked, the mechanical difficulties to be solved, all
excited popular opinion to the highest pitch.
More than a year would elapse between the commencement of the work and its completion;
but the interval would not be void of excitement. The place to be chosen for the boring, the
casting the metal of the Columbiad, its perilous loading, all this was more than necessary to
excite public curiosity. The projectile, once fired, would be out of sight in a few seconds;
then what would become of it, how it would behave in space, how it would reach the moon,
none but a few privileged persons would see with their own eyes. Thus, then, the preparations
for the experiment and the precise details of its execution constituted the real source of
interest.
In the meantime the purely scientific attraction of the enterprise was all at once heightened by
an incident.
It is known what numerous legions of admirers and friends the Barbicane project had called
round its author. But, notwithstanding the number and importance of the majority, it was not
destined to be unanimous. One man, one out of all the United States, protested against the
Gun Club. He attacked it violently on every occasion, and for human nature is thus
constituted Barbicane was more sensitive to this one man’s opposition than to the applause
of all the others.
Nevertheless he well knew the motive of this antipathy, from whence came this solitary
enmity, why it was personal and of ancient date; lastly, in what rivalry it had taken root.
The president of the Gun Club had never seen this persevering enemy. Happily, for the
meeting of the two men would certainly have had disastrous consequences. This rival was
a savant like Barbicane, a proud, enterprising, determined, and violent character, a pure
Yankee. His name was Captain Nicholl. He lived in Philadelphia.
No one is ignorant of the curious struggle which went on during the Federal war between the
projectile and ironclad vessels, the former destined to pierce the latter, the latter determined
not to be pierced. Thence came a radical transformation in the navies of the two continents.
Cannon-balls and iron plates struggled for supremacy, the former getting larger as the latter
got thicker. Ships armed with formidable guns went into the fire under shelter of their
invulnerable armour. The Merrimac, Monitor, ram Tennessee, and Wechhausen shot
enormous projectiles after having made themselves proof against the projectiles of other
ships. They did to others what they would not have others do to them, an immoral principle
upon which the whole art of war is based.
Now Barbicane was a great caster of projectiles, and Nicholl was an equally great forger of
plate-armour. The one cast night and day at Baltimore, the other forged day and night at
Philadelphia. Each followed an essentially different current of ideas.
As soon as Barbicane had invented a new projectile, Nicholl invented a new plate armour.
The president of the Gun Club passed his life in piercing holes, the captain in preventing him
doing it. Hence a constant rivalry which even touched their persons. Nicholl appeared in
35
Barbicane’s dreams as an impenetrable ironclad against which he split, and Barbicane in
Nicholl’s dreams appeared like a projectile which ripped him up.
Still, although they ran along two diverging lines, these savants would have ended by
meeting each other in spite of all the axioms in geometry; but then it would have been on a
duel field. Happily for these worthy citizens, so useful to their country, a distance of from
fifty to sixty miles separated them, and their friends put such obstacles in the way that they
never met.
At present it was not clearly known which of the two inventors held the palm. The results
obtained rendered a just decision difficult. It seemed, however, that in the end armour-plate
would have to give way to projectiles. Nevertheless, competent men had their doubts. At the
latest experiments the cylindro-conical shots of Barbicane had no more effect than pins upon
Nicholl’s armour-plate. That day the forger of Philadelphia believed himself victorious, and
henceforth had nothing but disdain for his rival. But when, later on, Barbicane substituted
simple howitzers of 600 lbs. for conical shots, the captain was obliged to go down in his own
estimation. It fact, these projectiles, though of mediocre velocity, drilled with holes and broke
to pieces armour-plate of the best metal.
Things had reached this point and victory seemed to rest with the projectile, when the war
ended the very day that Nicholl terminated a new forged armour-plate. It was a masterpiece
of its kind. It defied all the projectiles in the world. The captain had it taken to the
Washington Polygon and challenged the president of the Gun Club to pierce it. Barbicane,
peace having been made, would not attempt the experiment.
Then Nicholl, in a rage, offered to expose his armour-plate to the shock of any kind of
projectile, solid, hollow, round, or conical.
The president, who was determined not to compromise his last success, refused.
Nicholl, excited by this unqualified obstinacy, tried to tempt Barbicane by leaving him every
advantage. He proposed to put his plate 200 yards from the gun. Barbicane still refused. At
100 yards? Not even at 75.
“At 50, then,” cried the captain, through the newspapers, “at 25 yards from my plate, and I
will be behind it.”
Barbicane answered that even if Captain Nicholl would be in front of it he would not fire any
more.
On this reply, Nicholl could no longer contain himself. He had recourse to personalities; he
insinuated cowardice that the man who refuses to fire a shot from a cannon is very nearly
being afraid of it; that, in short, the artillerymen who fight now at six miles distance have
prudently substituted mathematical formulae for individual courage, and that there is as much
bravery required to quietly wait for a cannon-ball behind armour-plate as to send it according
to all the rules of science.
To these insinuations Barbicane answered nothing. Perhaps he never knew about them, for
the calculations of his great enterprise absorbed him entirely.
When he made his famous communication to the Gun Club, the anger of Captain Nicholl
reached its maximum. Mixed with it was supreme jealousy and a sentiment of absolute
powerlessness. How could he invent anything better than a Columbiad 900 feet long? What
armour-plate could ever resist a projectile of 30,000 lbs.? Nicholl was at first crushed by this
cannon-ball, then he recovered and resolved to crush the proposition by the weight of his best
arguments.
36
He therefore violently attacked the labours of the Gun Club. He sent a number of letters to the
newspapers, which they did not refuse to publish. He tried to demolish Barbicane’s work
scientifically. Once the war begun, he called reasons of every kind to his aid, reasons it must
be acknowledged often specious and of bad metal.
Firstly, Barbicane was violently attacked about his figures. Nicholl tried to prove by A + B
the falseness of his formulae, and he accused him of being ignorant of the rudimentary
principles of ballistics. Amongst other errors, and according to Nicholl’s own calculations, it
was impossible to give any body a velocity of 12,000 yards a second. He sustained, algebra in
hand, that even with that velocity a projectile thus heavy would never pass the limits of the
terrestrial atmosphere. It would not even go eight leagues! Better still. Granted the velocity,
and taking it as sufficient, the shot would not resist the pressure of the gas developed by the
combustion of 1,600,000 pounds of powder, and even if it did resist that pressure, it at least
would not support such a temperature; it would melt as it issued from the Columbiad, and
would fall in red-hot rain on the heads of the imprudent spectators.
Barbicane paid no attention to these attacks, and went on with his work.
Then Nicholl considered the question in its other aspects. Without speaking of its uselessness
from all other points of view, he looked upon the experiment as exceedingly dangerous, both
for the citizens who authorised so condemnable a spectacle by their presence, and for the
towns near the deplorable cannon. He also remarked that if the projectile did not reach its
destination, a result absolutely impossible, it was evident that it would fall on to the earth
again, and that the fall of such a mass multiplied by the square of its velocity would
singularly damage some point on the globe. Therefore, in such a circumstance, and without
any restriction being put upon the rights of free citizens, it was one of those cases in which
the intervention of government became necessary, and the safety of all must not be
endangered for the good pleasure of a single individual.
It will be seen to what exaggeration Captain Nicholl allowed himself to be carried. He was
alone in his opinion. Nobody took any notice of his Cassandra prophecies. They let him
exclaim as much as he liked, till his throat was sore if he pleased. He had constituted himself
the defender of a cause lost in advance. He was heard but not listened to, and he did not carry
off a single admirer from the president of the Gun Club, who did not even take the trouble to
refute his rival’s arguments.
Nicholl, driven into his last intrenchments, and not being able to fight for his opinion,
resolved to pay for it. He therefore proposed in the Richmond Inquirer a series of bets
conceived in these terms and in an increasing proportion.
He bet that 
1. The funds necessary for the Gun Club’s enterprise would not be forthcoming, 1,000 dols.
2. That the casting of a cannon of 900 feet was impracticable and would not succeed, 2,000
dols.
3. That it would be impossible to load the Columbiad, and that the pyroxyle would ignite
spontaneously under the weight of the projectile, 3,000 dols.
4. That the Columbiad would burst at the first discharge, 4,000 dols.
5. That the projectile would not even go six miles, and would fall a few seconds after its
discharge, 5,000 dols.
It will be seen that the captain was risking an important sum in his invincible obstinacy. No
less than 15,000 dols. were at stake.
37
Notwithstanding the importance of the wager, he received on the 19th of October a sealed
packet of superb laconism, couched in these terms: 
“Baltimore, October 18th.
“Done.
“BARBICANE.”
38
XI. Florida And Texas
There still remained one question to be decided a place favourable to the experiment had to
be chosen. According to the recommendation of the Cambridge Observatory the gun must be
aimed perpendicularly to the plane of the horizon that is to say, towards the zenith. Now the
moon only appears in the zenith in the places situated between 0° and 28° of latitude, or, in
other terms, when her declination is only 28°. The question was, therefore, to determine the
exact point of the globe where the immense Columbiad should be cast.
On the 20th of October the Gun Club held a general meeting. Barbicane brought a
magnificent map of the United States by Z. Belltropp. But before he had time to unfold it J.T.
Maston rose with his habitual vehemence, and began to speak as follows: 
“Honourable colleagues, the question we are to settle to-day is really of national importance,
and will furnish us with an occasion for doing a great act of patriotism.”
The members of the Gun Club looked at each other without understanding what the orator
was coming to.
“Not one of you,” he continued, “would think of doing anything to lessen the glory of his
country, and if there is one right that the Union may claim it is that of harbouring in its bosom
the formidable cannon of the Gun Club. Now, under the present circumstances ”
“Will you allow me ” said Barbicane.
“I demand the free discussion of ideas,” replied the impetuous J.T. Maston, “and I maintain
that the territory from which our glorious projectile will rise ought to belong to the Union.”
“Certainly,” answered several members.
“Well, then, as our frontiers do not stretch far enough, as on the south the ocean is our limit,
as we must seek beyond the United States and in a neighbouring country this 28th parallel,
this is all a legitimate casus belli, and I demand that war should be declared against Mexico!”
“No, no!” was cried from all parts.
“No!” replied J.T. Maston. “I am much astonished at hearing such a word in these precincts!”
“But listen ”
“Never! never!” cried the fiery orator. “Sooner or later this war will be declared, and I
demand that it should be this very day.”
“Maston,” said Barbicane, making his bell go off with a crash, “I agree with you that the
experiment cannot and ought not to be made anywhere but on the soil of the Union, but if I
had been allowed to speak before, and you had glanced at this map, you would know that it is
perfectly useless to declare war against our neighbours, for certain frontiers of the United
States extend beyond the 28th parallel. Look, we have at our disposition all the southern part
of Texas and Florida.”
This incident had no consequences; still it was not without regret that J.T. Maston allowed
himself to be convinced. It was, therefore, decided that the Columbiad should be cast either
on the soil of Texas or on that of Florida. But this decision was destined to create an
unexampled rivalry between the towns of these two states.
39
The 28th parallel, when it touches the American coast, crosses the peninsula of Florida, and
divides it into two nearly equal portions. Then, plunging into the Gulf of Mexico, it subtends
the arc formed by the coasts of Alabama, Mississippi, and Louisiana; then skirting Texas, off
which it cuts an angle, it continues its direction over Mexico, crosses the Sonora and Old
California, and loses itself in the Pacific Ocean; therefore only the portions of Texas and
Florida situated below this parallel fulfilled the requisite conditions of latitude recommended
by the Observatory of Cambridge.
The southern portion of Florida contains no important cities. It only bristles with forts raised
against wandering Indians. One town only, Tampa Town, could put in a claim in favour of its
position.
In Texas, on the contrary, towns are more numerous and more important. Corpus Christi in
the county of Nuaces, and all the cities situated on the Rio Bravo, Laredo, Comalites, San
Ignacio in Web, Rio Grande city in Starr, Edinburgh in Hidalgo, Santa-Rita, El Panda, and
Brownsville in Cameron, formed a powerful league against the pretensions of Florida.
The decision, therefore, was hardly made public before the Floridan and Texican deputies
flocked to Baltimore by the shortest way. From that moment President Barbicane and the
influential members of the Gun Club were besieged day and night by formidable claims. If
seven towns of Greece contended for the honour of being Homer’s birthplace, two entire
states threatened to fight over a cannon.
These rival parties were then seen marching with weapons about the streets of the town.
Every time they met a fight was imminent, which would have had disastrous consequences.
Happily the prudence and skill of President Barbicane warded off this danger. Personal
demonstrations found an outlet in the newspapers of the different states. It was thus that
the New York Herald and the Tribune supported the claims of Texas, whilst the Times and
the American Review took the part of the Floridan deputies. The members of the Gun Club
did not know which to listen to.
Texas came up proudly with its twenty-six counties, which it seemed to put in array; but
Florida answered that twelve counties proved more than twenty-six in a country six times
smaller.
Texas bragged of its 33,000 inhabitants; but Florida, much smaller, boasted of being much
more densely populated with 56,000. Besides, Florida accused Texas of being the home of
paludian fevers, which carried off, one year with another, several thousands of inhabitants,
and Florida was not far wrong.
In its turn Texas replied that Florida need not envy its fevers, and that it was, at least,
imprudent to call other countries unhealthy when Florida itself had chronic “vomito negro,”
and Texas was not far wrong.
“Besides,” added the Texicans through the New York Herald, “there are rights due to a state
that grows the best cotton in all America, a state which produces holm oak for building ships,
a state that contains superb coal and mines of iron that yield fifty per cent. of pure ore.”
To that the American Review answered that the soil of Florida, though not so rich, offered
better conditions for the casting of the Columbiad, as it was composed of sand and clayground.
“But,” answered the Texicans, “before anything can be cast in a place, it must get to that
place; now communication with Florida is difficult, whilst the coast of Texas offers
Galveston Bay, which is fourteen leagues round, and could contain all the fleets in the
world.”
40
“Why,” replied the newspapers devoted to Florida, “your Galveston Bay is situated above the
29th parallel, whilst our bay of Espiritu-Santo opens precisely at the 28th degree of latitude,
and by it ships go direct to Tampa Town.”
“A nice bay truly!” answered Texas; “it is half-choked up with sand.”
“Any one would think, to hear you talk,” cried Florida, “that I was a savage country.”
“Well, the Seminoles do still wander over your prairies!”
“And what about your Apaches and your Comanches are they civilised?”
The war had been thus kept up for some days when Florida tried to draw her adversary upon
another ground, and one morning the Times insinuated that the enterprise being “essentially
American,” it ought only to be attempted upon an “essentially American” territory.
At these words Texas could not contain itself.
“American!” it cried, “are we not as American as you? Were not Texas and Florida both
incorporated in the Union in 1845?”
“Certainly,” answered the Times, “but we have belonged to America since 1820.”
“Yes,” replied the Tribune, “after having been Spanish or English for 200 years, you were
sold to the United States for 5,000,000 of dollars!”
“What does that matter?” answered Florida. “Need we blush for that? Was not Louisiana
bought in 1803 from Napoleon for 16,000,000 of dollars?”
“It is shameful!” then cried the Texican deputies. “A miserable slice of land like Florida to
dare to compare itself with Texas, which, instead of being sold, made itself independent,
which drove out the Mexicans on the 2nd of March, 1836, which declared itself Federative
Republican after the victory gained by Samuel Houston on the banks of the San Jacinto over
the troops of Santa-Anna a country, in short, which voluntarily joined itself to the United
States of America!”
“Because it was afraid of the Mexicans!” answered Florida.
“Afraid!” From the day this word, really too cutting, was pronounced, the situation became
intolerable. An engagement was expected between the two parties in the streets of Baltimore.
The deputies were obliged to be watched.
President Barbicane was half driven wild. Notes, documents, and letters full of threats
inundated his house. Which course ought he to decide upon? In the point of view of fitness of
soil, facility of communications, and rapidity of transport, the rights of the two states were
really equal. As to the political personalities, they had nothing to do with the question.
Now this hesitation and embarrassment had already lasted some time when Barbicane
resolved to put an end to it; he called his colleagues together, and the solution he proposed to
them was a profoundly wise one, as will be seen from the following: 
“After due consideration,” said he, “of all that has just occurred between Florida and Texas, it
is evident that the same difficulties will again crop up between the towns of the favoured
state. The rivalry will be changed from state to city, and that is all. Now Texas contains
eleven towns with the requisite conditions that will dispute the honour of the enterprise, and
that will create fresh troubles for us, whilst Florida has but one; therefore I decide for Tampa
Town!”
The Texican deputies were thunderstruck at this decision. It put them into a terrible rage, and
they sent nominal provocations to different members of the Gun Club. There was only one
41
course for the magistrates of Baltimore to take, and they took it. They had the steam of a
special train got up, packed the Texicans into it, whether they would or no, and sent them
away from the town at a speed of thirty miles an hour.
But they were not carried off too quickly to hurl a last and threatening sarcasm at their
adversaries.
Making allusion to the width of Florida, a simple peninsula between two seas, they pretended
it would not resist the shock, and would be blown up the first time the cannon was fired.
“Very well! let it be blown up!” answered the Floridans with a laconism worthy of ancient
times.
42
XII. “Urbi Et Orbi”
The astronomical, mechanical, and topographical difficulties once removed, there remained
the question of money. An enormous sum was necessary for the execution of the project. No
private individual, no single state even, could have disposed of the necessary millions.
President Barbicane had resolved although the enterprise was American to make it a
business of universal interest, and to ask every nation for its financial co-operation. It was the
bounded right and duty of all the earth to interfere in the business of the satellite. The
subscription opened at Baltimore, for this end extended thence to all the world urbi et orbi.
This subscription was destined to succeed beyond all hope; yet the money was to be given,
not lent. The operation was purely disinterested, in the literal meaning of the word, and
offered no chance of gain.
But the effect of Barbicane’s communication had not stopped at the frontiers of the United
States; it had crossed the Atlantic and Pacific, had invaded both Asia and Europe, both Africa
and Oceania. The observatories of the Union were immediately put into communication with
the observatories of foreign countries; some those of Paris, St. Petersburg, the Cape, Berlin,
Altona, Stockholm, Warsaw, Hamburg, Buda, Bologna, Malta, Lisbon, Benares, Madras, and
Pekin sent their compliments to the Gun Club; the others prudently awaited the result.
As to the Greenwich Observatory, seconded by the twenty-two astronomical establishments
of Great Britain, it made short work of it; it boldly denied the possibility of success, and took
up Captain Nicholl’s theories. Whilst the different scientific societies promised to send
deputies to Tampa Town, the Greenwich staff met and contemptuously dismissed the
Barbicane proposition. This was pure English jealousy and nothing else.
Generally speaking, the effect upon the world of science was excellent, and from thence it
passed to the masses, who, in general, were greatly interested in the question, a fact of great
importance, seeing those masses were to be called upon to subscribe a considerable capital.
On the 8th of October President Barbicane issued a manifesto, full of enthusiasm, in which he
made appeal to “all persons on the face of the earth willing to help.” This document,
translated into every language, had great success.
Subscriptions were opened in the principal towns of the Union with a central office at the
Baltimore Bank, 9, Baltimore street; then subscriptions were opened in the different countries
of the two continents: At Vienna, by S.M. de Rothschild; St. Petersburg, Stieglitz and Co.;
Paris, Crédit Mobilier; Stockholm, Tottie and Arfuredson; London, N.M. de Rothschild and
Son; Turin, Ardouin and Co.; Berlin, Mendelssohn; Geneva, Lombard, Odier, and Co.;
Constantinople, Ottoman Bank; Brussels, J. Lambert; Madrid, Daniel Weisweller;
Amsterdam, Netherlands Credit Co.; Rome, Torlonia and Co.; Lisbon, Lecesne; Copenhagen,
Private Bank; Buenos Ayres, Mana Bank; Rio Janeiro, Mana Bank; Monte Video, Mana
Bank; Valparaiso, Thomas La Chambre and Co.; Lima, Thomas La Chambre and Co.;
Mexico, Martin Daran and Co.
Three days after President Barbicane’s manifesto 400,000 dollars were received in the
different towns of the Union. With such a sum in hand the Gun Club could begin at once.
But a few days later telegrams informed America that foreign subscriptions were pouring in
rapidly. Certain countries were distinguished by their generosity; others let go their money
less easily. It was a matter of temperament.
43
However, figures are more eloquent than words, and the following is an official statement of
the sums paid to the credit of the Gun Club when the subscription was closed: 
The contingent of Russia was the enormous sum of 368,733 roubles. This need astonish no
one who remembers the scientific taste of the Russians and the impetus which they have
given to astronomical studies, thanks to their numerous observatories, the principal of which
cost 2,000,000 roubles.
France began by laughing at the pretensions of the Americans. The moon served as an excuse
for a thousand stale puns and a score of vaudevilles in which bad taste contested the palm
with ignorance. But, as the French formerly paid after singing, they now paid after laughing,
and subscribed a sum of 1,258,930 francs. At that price they bought the right to joke a little.
Austria, in the midst of her financial difficulties, was sufficiently generous. Her part in the
public subscription amounted to 216,000 florins, which were welcome.
Sweden and Norway contributed 52,000 rix-dollars. The figure was small considering the
country; but it would certainly have been higher if a subscription had been opened at
Christiania as well as at Stockholm. For some reason or other the Norwegians do not like to
send their money to Norway.
Prussia, by sending 250,000 thalers, testified her approbation of the enterprise. Her different
observatories contributed an important sum, and were amongst the most ardent in
encouraging President Barbicane.
Turkey behaved generously, but she was personally interested in the business; the moon, in
fact, rules the course of her years and her Ramadan fast. She could do no less than give
1,372,640 piastres, and she gave them with an ardour that betrayed, however, a certain
pressure from the Government of the Porte.
Belgium distinguished herself amongst all the second order of States by a gift of 513,000
francs, about one penny and a fraction for each inhabitant.
Holland and her colonies contributed 110,000 florins, only demanding a discount of five per
cent., as she paid ready money.
Denmark, rather confined for room, gave, notwithstanding, 9,000 ducats, proving her love for
scientific experiments.
The Germanic Confederation subscribed 34,285 florins; more could not be asked from her;
besides, she would not have given more.
Although in embarrassed circumstances, Italy found 2,000,000 francs in her children’s
pockets, but by turning them well inside out. If she had then possessed Venetia she would
have given more, but she did not yet possess Venetia.
The Pontifical States thought they could not send less than 7,040 Roman crowns, and
Portugal pushed her devotion to the extent of 3,000 cruzades.
Mexico gent the widow’s mite, 86 piastres; but empires in course of formation are always in
rather embarrassed circumstances.
Switzerland sent the modest sum of 257 francs to the American scheme. It must be frankly
stated that Switzerland only looked upon the practical side of the operation; the action of
sending a bullet to the moon did not seem of a nature sufficient for the establishing of any
communication with the Queen of Night, so Switzerland thought it imprudent to engage
capital in an enterprise depending upon such uncertain events. After all, Switzerland was,
perhaps, right.
44
As to Spain, she found it impossible to get together more than 110 reals. She gave as an
excuse that she had her railways to finish. The truth is that science is not looked upon very
favourably in that country; it is still a little behindhand. And then certain Spaniards, and not
the most ignorant either, had no clear conception of the size of the projectile compared with
that of the moon; they feared it might disturb the satellite from her orbit, and make her fall on
to the surface of the terrestrial globe. In that case it was better to have nothing to do with it,
which they carried out, with that small exception.
England alone remained. The contemptuous antipathy with which she received Barbicane’s
proposition is known. The English have but a single mind in their 25,000,000 of bodies which
Great Britain contains. They gave it to be understood that the enterprise of the Gun Club was
contrary “to the principle of non-intervention,” and they did not subscribe a single farthing.
At this news the Gun Club contented itself with shrugging its shoulders, and returned to its
great work. When South America that is to say, Peru, Chili, Brazil, the provinces of La
Plata and Columbia had poured into their hands their quota of 300,000 dollars, it found
itself possessed of a considerable capital of which the following is a statement: 
United States subscription, 4,000,000 dollars; foreign subscriptions, 1,446,675 dollars; total,
5,446,675 dollars.
This was the large sum poured by the public into the coffers of the Gun Club.
No one need be surprised at its importance. The work of casting, boring, masonry, transport
of workmen, and their installation in an almost uninhabited country, the construction of
furnaces and workshops, the manufacturing tools, powder, projectile and incidental expenses
would, according to the estimates, absorb nearly the whole. Some of the cannon-shots fired
during the war cost 1,000 dollars each; that of President Barbicane, unique in the annals of
artillery, might well cost 5,000 times more.
On the 20th of October a contract was made with the Goldspring Manufactory, New York,
which during the war had furnished Parrott with his best cast-iron guns.
It was stipulated between the contracting parties that the Goldspring Manufactory should
pledge itself to send to Tampa Town, in South Florida, the necessary materials for the casting
of the Columbiad.
This operation was to be terminated, at the latest, on the 15th of the next October, and the
cannon delivered in good condition, under penalty of 100 dollars a day forfeit until the moon
should again present herself under the same conditions that is to say, during eighteen years
and eleven days.
The engagement of the workmen, their pay, and the necessary transports all to be made by the
Goldspring Company.
This contract, made in duplicate, was signed by I. Barbicane, president of the Gun Club, and
J. Murphison, Manager of the Goldspring Manufactory, who thus signed on the part of the
contracting parties.
45
XIII. Stony Hill
Since the choice made by the members of the Gun Club to the detriment of Texas, every one
in America where every one knows how to read made it his business to study the
geography of Florida. Never before had the booksellers sold so many Bertram’s Travels in
Florida, Roman’s Natural History of East and West Florida, Williams’ Territory of Florida,
and Cleland on the Culture of the Sugar Cane in East Florida. New editions of these works
were required. There was quite a rage for them.
Barbicane had something better to do than to read; he wished to see with his own eyes and
choose the site of the Columbiad. Therefore, without losing a moment, he put the funds
necessary for the construction of a telescope at the disposition of the Cambridge Observatory,
and made a contract with the firm of Breadwill and Co., of Albany, for the making of the
aluminium projectile; then he left Baltimore accompanied by J.T. Maston, Major
Elphinstone, and the manager of the Goldspring Manufactory.
The next day the four travelling companions reached New Orleans. There they embarked on
board the Tampico, a despatch-boat belonging to the Federal Navy, which the Government
had placed at their disposal, and, with all steam on, they quickly lost sight of the shores of
Louisiana.
The passage was not a long one; two days after its departure the Tampico, having made four
hundred and eighty miles, sighted the Floridian coast. As it approached, Barbicane saw a low,
flat coast, looking rather unfertile. After coasting a series of creeks rich in oysters and
lobsters, the Tampico entered the Bay of Espiritu-Santo.
This bay is divided into two long roadsteads, those of Tampa and Hillisboro, the narrow
entrance to which the steamer soon cleared. A short time afterwards the batteries of Fort
Brooke rose above the waves and the town of Tampa appeared, carelessly lying on a little
natural harbour formed by the mouth of the river Hillisboro.
There the Tampico anchored on October 22nd, at seven p.m.; the four passengers landed
immediately.
Barbicane felt his heart beat violently as he set foot on Floridian soil; he seemed to feel it
with his feet like an architect trying the solidity of a house. J.T. Maston scratched the ground
with his steel hook.
“Gentlemen,” then said Barbicane, “we have no time to lose, and we will set off on horseback
to-morrow to survey the country.”
The minute Barbicane landed the three thousand inhabitants of Tampa Town went out to
meet him, an honour quite due to the president of the Gun Club, who had decided in their
favour. They received him with formidable exclamations, but Barbicane escaped an ovation
by shutting himself up in his room at the Franklin Hotel and refusing to see any one.
The next day, October 23rd, small horses of Spanish race, full of fire and vigour, pawed the
ground under his windows. But, instead of four, there were fifty, with their riders. Barbicane
went down accompanied by his three companions, who were at first astonished to find
themselves in the midst of such a cavalcade. He remarked besides that each horseman carried
a carbine slung across his shoulders and pistols in his holsters. The reason for such a display
of force was immediately given him by a young Floridian, who said to him 
“Sir, the Seminoles are there.”
46
“What Seminoles?”
“Savages who frequent the prairies, and we deemed it prudent to give you an escort.”
“Pooh!” exclaimed J.T. Maston as he mounted his steed.
“It is well to be on the safe side,” answered the Floridian.
“Gentlemen,” replied Barbicane, “I thank you for your attention, and now let us be off.”
The little troop set out immediately, and disappeared in a cloud of dust. It was five a.m.; the
sun shone brilliantly already, and the thermometer indicated 84°, but fresh sea breezes
moderated this excessive heat.
Barbicane, on leaving Tampa Town, went down south and followed the coast to Alifia Creek.
This small river falls into Hillisboro Bay, twelve miles below Tampa Town. Barbicane and
his escort followed its right bank going up towards the east. The waves of the bay
disappeared behind an inequality in the ground, and the Floridian country was alone in sight.
Florida is divided into two parts; the one to the north, more populous and less abandoned, has
Tallahassee for capital, and Pensacola, one of the principal marine arsenals of the United
States; the other, lying between the Atlantic and the Gulf of Mexico, is only a narrow
peninsula, eaten away by the current of the Gulf Stream a little tongue of land lost amidst a
small archipelago, which the numerous vessels of the Bahama Channel double continually. It
is the advanced sentinel of the gulf of great tempests. The superficial area of this state
measures 38,033,267 acres, amongst which one had to be chosen situated beyond the 28th
parallel and suitable for the enterprise. As Barbicane rode along he attentively examined the
configuration of the ground and its particular distribution.
Florida, discovered by Juan Ponce de Leon in 1512, on Palm Sunday, was first of all
named Pascha Florida. It was well worthy of that designation with its dry and arid coasts.
But a few miles from the shore the nature of the ground gradually changed, and the country
showed itself worthy of its name; the soil was cut up by a network of creeks, rivers,
watercourses, ponds, and small lakes; it might have been mistaken for Holland or Guiana; but
the ground gradually rose and soon showed its cultivated plains, where all the vegetables of
the North and South grow in perfection, its immense fields, where a tropical sun and the
water conserved in its clayey texture do all the work of cultivating, and lastly its prairies of
pineapples, yams, tobacco, rice, cotton, and sugarcanes, which extended as far as the eye
could reach, spreading out their riches with careless prodigality.
Barbicane appeared greatly satisfied on finding the progressive elevation of the ground, and
when J.T. Maston questioned him on the subject,
“My worthy friend,” said he, “it is greatly to our interest to cast our Columbiad on elevated
ground.”
“In order to be nearer the moon?” exclaimed the secretary of the Gun Club.
“No,” answered Barbicane, smiling. “What can a few yards more or less matter? No, but on
elevated ground our work can be accomplished more easily; we shall not have to struggle
against water, which will save us long and expensive tubings, and that has to be taken into
consideration when a well 900 feet deep has to be sunk.”
“You are right,” said Murchison, the engineer; “we must, as much as possible, avoid
watercourses during the casting; but if we meet with springs they will not matter much; we
can exhaust them with our machines or divert them from their course. Here we have not to
work at an artesian well, narrow and dark, where all the boring implements have to work in
47
the dark. No; we can work under the open sky, with spade and pickaxe, and, by the help of
blasting, our work will not take long.”
“Still,” resumed Barbicane, “if by the elevation of the ground or its nature we can avoid a
struggle with subterranean waters, we can do our work more rapidly and perfectly; we must,
therefore, make our cutting in ground situated some thousands of feet above the level of the
sea.”
“You are right, Mr. Barbicane, and, if I am not mistaken, we shall soon find a suitable spot.”
“I should like to see the first spadeful turned up,” said the president.
“And I the last!” exclaimed J.T. Maston.
“We shall manage it, gentlemen,” answered the engineer; “and, believe me, the Goldspring
Company will not have to pay you any forfeit for delay.”
“Faith! it had better not,” replied J.T. Maston; “a hundred dollars a day till the moon presents
herself in the same conditions that is to say, for eighteen years and eleven days do you
know that would make 658,000 dollars?”
“No, sir, we do not know, and we shall not need to learn.”
About ten a.m. the little troop had journeyed about twelve miles; to the fertile country
succeeded a forest region. There were the most varied perfumes in tropical profusion. The
almost impenetrable forests were made up of pomegranates, orange, citron, fig, olive, and
apricot trees, bananas, huge vines, the blossoms and fruit of which rivalled each other in
colour and perfume. Under the perfumed shade of these magnificent trees sang and fluttered a
world of brilliantly-coloured birds, amongst which the crab-eater deserved a jewel casket,
worthy of its feathered gems, for a nest.
J.T. Maston and the major could not pass through such opulent nature without admiring its
splendid beauty.
But President Barbicane, who thought little of these marvels, was in a hurry to hasten
onwards; this country, so fertile, displeased him by its very fertility; without being otherwise
hydropical, he felt water under his feet, and sought in vain the signs of incontestable aridity.
In the meantime they journeyed on. They were obliged to ford several rivers, and not without
danger, for they were infested with alligators from fifteen to eighteen feet long. J.T. Maston
threatened them boldly with his formidable hook, but he only succeeded in frightening the
pelicans, phaetons, and teals that frequented the banks, while the red flamingoes looked on
with a stupid stare.
At last these inhabitants of humid countries disappeared in their turn. The trees became
smaller and more thinly scattered in smaller woods; some isolated groups stood amidst
immense plains where ranged herds of startled deer.
“At last!” exclaimed Barbicane, rising in his stirrups. “Here is the region of pines.”
“And savages,” answered the major.
In fact, a few Seminoles appeared on the horizon. They moved about backwards and forwards
on their fleet horses, brandishing long lances or firing their guns with a dull report. However,
they confined themselves to these hostile demonstrations, which had no effect on Barbicane
and his companions.
They were then in the middle of a rocky plain, a vast open space of several acres in extent
which the sun covered with burning rays. It was formed by a wide elevation of the soil, and
48
seemed to offer to the members of the Gun Club all the required conditions for the
construction of their Columbiad.
“Halt!” cried Barbicane, stopping. “Has this place any name?”
“It is called Stony Hill,” answered the Floridians.
Barbicane, without saying a word, dismounted, took his instruments, and began to fix his
position with extreme precision. The little troop drawn up around him watched him in
profound silence.
At that moment the sun passed the meridian. Barbicane, after an interval, rapidly noted the
result of his observation, and said 
“This place is situated 1,800 feet above the sea level in lat. 27° 7’ and West long. 5° 7’ by the
Washington meridian. It appears to me by its barren and rocky nature to offer every condition
favourable to our enterprise; we will therefore raise our magazines, workshops, furnaces, and
workmen’s huts here, and it is from this very spot,” said he, stamping upon it with his foot,
“the summit of Stony Hill, that our projectile will start for the regions of the solar world!”
49
XIV. Pickaxe And Trowel
That same evening Barbicane and his companions returned to Tampa Town, and Murchison,
the engineer, re-embarked on board the Tampico for New Orleans. He was to engage an army
of workmen to bring back the greater part of the working-stock. The members of the Gun
Club remained at Tampa Town in order to set on foot the preliminary work with the
assistance of the inhabitants of the country.
Eight days after its departure the Tampico returned to the Espiritu-Santo Bay with a fleet of
steamboats. Murchison had succeeded in getting together 1,500 workmen. In the evil days of
slavery he would have lost his time and trouble; but since America, the land of liberty, has
only contained freemen, they flock wherever they can get good pay. Now money was not
wanting to the Gun Club; it offered a high rate of wages with considerable and proportionate
perquisites. The workman enlisted for Florida could, once the work finished, depend upon a
capital placed in his name in the bank of Baltimore.
Murchison had therefore only to pick and choose, and could be severe about the intelligence
and skill of his workmen. He enrolled in his working legion the pick of mechanics, stokers,
iron-founders, lime-burners, miners, brickmakers, and artisans of every sort, white or black
without distinction of colour. Many of them brought their families with them. It was quite an
emigration.
On the 31st of October, at 10 a.m., this troop landed on the quays of Tampa Town. The
movement and activity which reigned in the little town that had thus doubled its population in
a single day may be imagined. In fact, Tampa Town was enormously benefited by this
enterprise of the Gun Club, not by the number of workmen who were immediately drafted to
Stony Hill, but by the influx of curious idlers who converged by degrees from all points of
the globe towards the Floridian peninsula.
During the first few days they were occupied in unloading the flotilla of the tools, machines,
provisions, and a large number of plate iron houses made in pieces separately pieced and
numbered. At the same time Barbicane laid the first sleepers of a railway fifteen miles long
that was destined to unite Stony Hill and Tampa Town.
It is known how American railways are constructed, with capricious bends, bold slopes, steep
hills, and deep valleys. They do not cost much and are not much in their way, only their trains
run off or jump off as they please. The railway from Tampa Town to Stony Hill was but a
trifle, and wanted neither much time nor much money for its construction.
Barbicane was the soul of this army of workmen who had come at his call. He animated
them, communicated to them his ardour, enthusiasm, and conviction. He was everywhere at
once, as if endowed with the gift of ubiquity, and always followed by J.T. Maston, his
bluebottle fly. His practical mind invented a thousand things. With him there were no
obstacles, difficulties, or embarrassment. He was as good a miner, mason, and mechanic as
he was an artilleryman, having an answer to every question, and a solution to every problem.
He corresponded actively with the Gun Club and the Goldspring Manufactory, and day and
night the Tampico kept her steam up awaiting his orders in Hillisboro harbour.
Barbicane, on the 1st of November, left Tampa Town with a detachment of workmen, and the
very next day a small town of workmen’s houses rose round Stony Hill. They surrounded it
with palisades, and from its movement and ardour it might soon have been taken for one of
the great cities of the Union. Life was regulated at once and work began in perfect order.
50
Careful boring had established the nature of the ground, and digging was begun on November
4th. That day Barbicane called his foremen together and said to them 
“You all know, my friends, why I have called you together in this part of Florida. We want to
cast a cannon nine feet in diameter, six feet thick, and with a stone revetment nineteen and a
half feet thick; we therefore want a well 60 feet wide and 900 feet deep. This large work must
be terminated in nine months. You have, therefore, 2,543,400 cubic feet of soil to dig out in
255 days that is to say, 10,000 cubic feet a day. That would offer no difficulty if you had
plenty of elbow-room, but as you will only have a limited space it will be more trouble.
Nevertheless as the work must be done it will be done, and I depend upon your courage as
much as upon your skill.”
At 8 a.m. the first spadeful was dug out of the Floridian soil, and from that moment this
useful tool did not stop idle a moment in the hands of the miner. The gangs relieved each
other every three hours.
Besides, although the work was colossal it did not exceed the limit of human capability. Far
from that. How many works of much greater difficulty, and in which the elements had to be
more directly contended against, had been brought to a successful termination! Suffice it to
mention the well of Father Joseph, made near Cairo by the Sultan Saladin at an epoch when
machines had not yet appeared to increase the strength of man a hundredfold, and which goes
down to the level of the Nile itself at a depth of 300 feet! And that other well dug at Coblentz
by the Margrave Jean of Baden, 600 feet deep! All that was needed was a triple depth and a
double width, which made the boring easier. There was not one foreman or workman who
doubted about the success of the operation.
An important decision taken by Murchison and approved of by Barbicane accelerated the
work. An article in the contract decided that the Columbiad should be hooped with wroughtiron a useless precaution, for the cannon could evidently do without hoops. This clause was
therefore given up. Hence a great economy of time, for they could then employ the new
system of boring now used for digging wells, by which the masonry is done at the same time
as the boring. Thanks to this very simple operation they were not obliged to prop up the
ground; the wall kept it up and went down by its own weight.
This manoeuvre was only to begin when the spade should have reached the solid part of the
ground.
On the 4th of November fifty workmen began to dig in the very centre of the inclosure
surrounded by palisades that is to say, the top of Stony Hill a circular hole sixty feet wide.
The spade first turned up a sort of black soil six inches deep, which it soon carried away. To
this soil succeeded two feet of fine sand, which was carefully taken out, as it was to be used
for the casting.
After this sand white clay appeared, similar to English chalk, and which was four feet thick.
Then the pickaxes rang upon the hard layer, a species of rock formed by very dry petrified
shells. At that point the hole was six and a half feet deep, and the masonry was begun.
At the bottom of that excavation they made an oak wheel, a sort of circle strongly bolted and
of enormous strength; in its centre a hole was pierced the size of the exterior diameter of the
Columbiad. It was upon this wheel that the foundations of the masonry were placed, the
hydraulic cement of which joined the stones solidly together. After the workmen had bricked
up the space from the circumference to the centre, they found themselves inclosed in a well
twenty-one feet wide.
51
When this work was ended the miners began again with spade and pickaxe, and set upon the
rock under the wheel itself, taking care to support it on extremely strong tressels; every time
the hole was two feet deeper they took away the tressels; the wheel gradually sank, taking
with it its circle of masonry, at the upper layer of which the masons worked incessantly,
taking care to make vent-holes for the escape of gas during the operation of casting.
This kind of work required great skill and constant attention on the part of the workmen;
more than one digging under the wheel was dangerous, and some were even mortally
wounded by the splinters of stone; but their energy did not slacken for a moment by day nor
night; by day, when the sun’s rays sent the thermometer up to 99° on the calcined planes; by
night, under the white waves of electric light, the noise of the pickaxe on the rock, the
blasting and the machines, together with the wreaths of smoke scattered through the air,
traced a circle of terror round Stony Hill, which the herds of buffaloes and the detachments of
Seminoles never dared to pass.
In the meantime the work regularly advanced; steam-cranes speeded the carrying away of the
rubbish; of unexpected obstacles there were none; all the difficulties had been foreseen and
guarded against.
When the first month had gone by the well had attained the depth assigned for the time i.e.,
112 feet. In December this depth was doubled, and tripled in January. During February the
workmen had to contend against a sheet of water which sprang from the ground. They were
obliged to employ powerful pumps and apparatus of compressed air to drain it off, so as to
close up the orifice from which it issued, just as leaks are caulked on board ship. At last they
got the better of these unwelcome springs, only in consequence of the loosening of the soil
the wheel partially gave way, and there was a landslip. The frightful force of this bricked
circle, more than 400 feet high, may be imagined! This accident cost the life of several
workmen. Three weeks had to be taken up in propping the stone revetment and making the
wheel solid again. But, thanks to the skill of the engineer and the power of the machines, it
was all set right, and the boring continued.
No fresh incident henceforth stopped the progress of the work, and on the 10th of June,
twenty days before the expiration of the delay fixed by Barbicane, the well, quite bricked
round, had reached the depth of 900 feet. At the bottom the masonry rested upon a massive
block, thirty feet thick, whilst at the top it was on a level with the soil.
President Barbicane and the members of the Gun Club warmly congratulated the engineer
Murchison; his cyclopean work had been accomplished with extraordinary rapidity.
During these eight months Barbicane did not leave Stony Hill for a minute; whilst he
narrowly watched over the boring operations, he took every precaution to insure the health
and well-being of his workmen, and he was fortunate enough to avoid the epidemics common
to large agglomerations of men, and so disastrous in those regions of the globe exposed to
tropical influence.
It is true that several workmen paid with their lives for the carelessness engendered by these
dangerous occupations; but such deplorable misfortunes cannot be avoided, and these are
details that Americans pay very little attention to. They are more occupied with humanity in
general than with individuals in particular. However, Barbicane professed the contrary
principles, and applied them upon every occasion. Thanks to his care, to his intelligence and
respectful intervention in difficult cases, to his prodigious and humane wisdom, the average
of catastrophes did not exceed that of cities on the other side of the Atlantic, amongst others
those of France, where they count about one accident upon every 200,000 francs of work.
52
XV. The Ceremony Of The Casting
During the eight months that were employed in the operation of boring the preparatory works
of the casting had been conducted simultaneously with extreme rapidity; a stranger arriving at
Stony Hill would have been much surprised at what he saw there.
Six hundred yards from the well, and standing in a circle round it as a central point, were
1,200 furnaces, each six feet wide and three yards apart. The line made by these 1,200
furnaces was two miles long. They were all built on the same model, with high quadrangular
chimneys, and had a singular effect. J.T. Maston thought the architectural arrangement
superb. It reminded him of the monuments at Washington. He thought there was nothing finer
in the world, not even in Greece, where he acknowledged never to have been.
It will be remembered that at their third meeting the committee decided to use cast-iron for
the Columbiad, and in particular the grey description. This metal is, in fact, the most
tenacious, ductile, and malleable, suitable for all moulding operations, and when smelted with
pit coal it is of superior quality for engine-cylinders, hydraulic presses, &c.
But cast-iron, if it has undergone a single fusion, is rarely homogeneous enough; and it is by
means of a second fusion that it is purified, refined, and dispossessed of its last earthly
deposits.
Before being forwarded to Tampa Town, the iron ore, smelted in the great furnaces of
Goldspring, and put in contact with coal and silicium heated to a high temperature, was
transformed into cast-iron. After this first operation the metal was taken to Stony Hill. But
there were 136 millions of pounds of cast-iron, a bulk too expensive to be sent by railway; the
price of transport would have doubled that of the raw material. It appeared preferable to
freight vessels at New York and to load them with the iron in bars; no less than sixty-eight
vessels of 1,000 tons were required, quite a fleet, which on May 3rd left New York, took the
Ocean route, coasted the American shores, entered the Bahama Channel, doubled the point of
Florida, and on the 10th of the same month entered the Bay of Espiritu-Santo and anchored
safely in the port of Tampa Town. There the vessels were unloaded and their cargo carried by
railway to Stony Hill, and about the middle of January the enormous mass of metal was
delivered at its destination.
It will easily be understood that 1,200 furnaces were not too many to melt these 60,000 tons
of iron simultaneously. Each of these furnaces contained about 1,400,000 lbs. of metal; they
had been built on the model of those used for the casting of the Rodman gun; they were
trapezoidal in form, with a high elliptical arch. The warming apparatus and the chimney were
placed at the two extremities of the furnace, so that it was equally heated throughout. These
furnaces, built of fireproof brick, were filled with coal-grates and a “sole” for the bars of iron;
this sole, inclosed at an angle of 25°, allowed the metal to flow into the receiving-troughs;
from thence 1,200 converging trenches carried it down to the central well.
The day following that upon which the works of masonry and casting were terminated,
Barbicane set to work upon the interior mould; his object now was to raise in the centre of the
well, with a coincident axis, a cylinder 900 feet high and nine in diameter, to exactly fill up
the space reserved for the bore of the Columbiad. This cylinder was made of a mixture of
clay and sand, with the addition of hay and straw. The space left between the mould and the
masonry was to be filled with the molten metal, which would thus make the sides of the
cannon six feet thick.
53
This cylinder, in order to have its equilibrium maintained, had to be consolidated with iron
bands and fixed at intervals by means of cross-clamps fastened into the stone lining; after the
casting these clamps would be lost in the block of metal, which would not be the worse for
them.
This operation was completed on the 8th of July, and the casting was fixed for the 10th.
“The casting will be a fine ceremony,” said J.T. Maston to his friend Barbicane.
“Undoubtedly,” answered Barbicane, “but it will not be a public one!”
“What! you will not open the doors of the inclosure to all comers?”
“Certainly not; the casting of the Columbiad is a delicate, not to say a dangerous, operation,
and I prefer that it should be done with closed doors. When the projectile is discharged you
may have a public ceremony if you like, but till then, no!”
The president was right; the operation might be attended with unforeseen danger, which a
large concourse of spectators would prevent being averted. It was necessary to preserve
complete freedom of movement. No one was admitted into the inclosure except a delegation
of members of the Gun Club who made the voyage to Tampa Town. Among them was the
brisk Bilsby, Tom Hunter, Colonel Blomsberry, Major Elphinstone, General Morgan,
and tutti quanti, to whom the casting of the Columbiad was a personal business. J.T. Maston
constituted himself their cicerone; he did not excuse them any detail; he led them about
everywhere, through the magazines, workshops, amongst the machines, and he forced them
to visit the 1,200 furnaces one after the other. At the end of the 1,200th visit they were rather
sick of it.
The casting was to take place precisely at twelve o’clock; the evening before each furnace
had been charged with 114,000 lbs. of metal in bars disposed crossway to each other so that
the warm air could circulate freely amongst them. Since early morning the 1,200 chimneys
had been pouring forth volumes of flames into the atmosphere, and the soil was shaken
convulsively. There were as many pounds of coal to be burnt as metal to be melted. There
were, therefore, 68,000 tons of coal throwing up before the sun a thick curtain of black
smoke.
The heat soon became unbearable in the circle of furnaces, the rambling of which resembled
the rolling of thunder; powerful bellows added their continuous blasts, and saturated the
incandescent furnaces with oxygen.
The operation of casting in order to succeed must be done rapidly. At a signal given by a
cannon-shot each furnace was to pour out the liquid iron and to be entirely emptied.
These arrangements made, foremen and workmen awaited the preconcerted moment with
impatience mixed with emotion. There was no longer any one in the inclosure, and each
superintendent took his place near the aperture of the run.
Barbicane and his colleagues, installed on a neighbouring eminence, assisted at the operation.
Before them a cannon was planted ready to be fired as a sign from the engineer.
A few minutes before twelve the first drops of metal began to run; the reservoirs were
gradually filled, and when the iron was all in a liquid state it was left quiet for some instants
in order to facilitate the separation of foreign substances.
Twelve o’clock struck. The cannon was suddenly fired, and shot its flame into the air. Twelve
hundred tapping-holes were opened simultaneously, and twelve hundred fiery serpents crept
along twelve hundred troughs towards the central well, rolling in rings of fire. There they
54
plunged with terrific noise down a depth of 900 feet. It was an exciting and magnificent
spectacle. The ground trembled, whilst these waves of iron, throwing into the sky their clouds
of smoke, evaporated at the same time the humidity of the mould, and hurled it upwards
through the vent-holes of the masonry in the form of impenetrable vapour. These artificial
clouds unrolled their thick spirals as they went up to a height of 3,000 feet into the air. Any
Red Indian wandering upon the limits of the horizon might have believed in the formation of
a new crater in the heart of Florida, and yet it was neither an irruption, nor a typhoon, nor a
storm, nor a struggle of the elements, nor one of those terrible phenomena which Nature is
capable of producing. No; man alone had produced those reddish vapours, those gigantic
flames worthy of a volcano, those tremendous vibrations like the shock of an earthquake,
those reverberations, rivals of hurricanes and storms, and it was his hand which hurled into an
abyss, dug by himself, a whole Niagara of molten metal!
55
XVI. The Columbiad
Had the operation of casting succeeded? People were reduced to mere conjecture. However,
there was every reason to believe in its success, as the mould had absorbed the entire mass of
metal liquefied in the furnaces. Still it was necessarily a long time impossible to be certain.
In fact, when Major Rodman cast his cannon of 160,000 lbs., it took no less than a fortnight
to cool. How long, therefore, would the monstrous Columbiad, crowned with its clouds of
vapour, and guarded by its intense heat, be kept from the eyes of its admirers? It was difficult
to estimate.
The impatience of the members of the Gun Club was put to a rude test during this lapse of
time. But it could not be helped. J.T. Maston was nearly roasted through his anxiety. A
fortnight after the casting an immense column of smoke was still soaring towards the sky, and
the ground burnt the soles of the feet within a radius of 200 feet round the summit of Stony
Hill.
The days went by; weeks followed them. There were no means of cooling the immense
cylinder. It was impossible to approach it. The members of the Gun Club were obliged to
wait with what patience they could muster.
“Here we are at the 10th of August,” said J.T. Maston one morning. “It wants hardly four
months to the 1st of December! There still remains the interior mould to be taken out, and the
Columbiad to be loaded! We never shall be ready! One cannot even approach the cannon!
Will it never get cool? That would be a cruel deception!”
They tried to calm the impatient secretary without succeeding. Barbicane said nothing, but
his silence covered serious irritation. To see himself stopped by an obstacle that time alone
could remove time, an enemy to be feared under the circumstances and to be in the power
of an enemy was hard for men of war.
However, daily observations showed a certain change in the state of the ground. Towards the
15th of August the vapour thrown off had notably diminished in intensity and thickness. A
few days after the earth only exhaled a slight puff of smoke, the last breath of the monster
shut up in its stone tomb. By degrees the vibrations of the ground ceased, and the circle of
heat contracted; the most impatient of the spectators approached; one day they gained ten
feet, the next twenty, and on the 22nd of August Barbicane, his colleagues, and the engineer
could take their place on the cast-iron surface which covered the summit of Stony Hill,
certainly a very healthy spot, where it was not yet allowed to have cold feet.
“At last!” cried the president of the Gun Club with an immense sigh of satisfaction.
The works were resumed the same day. The extraction of the interior mould was immediately
proceeded with in order to clear out the bore; pickaxes, spades, and boring-tools were set to
work without intermission; the clay and sand had become exceedingly hard under the action
of the heat; but by the help of machines they cleared away the mixture still burning at its
contact with the iron; the rubbish was rapidly carted away on the railway, and the work was
done with such spirit, Barbicane’s intervention was so urgent, and his arguments, presented
under the form of dollars, carried so much conviction, that on the 3rd of September all trace
of the mould had disappeared.
56
The operation of boring was immediately begun; the boring-machines were set up without
delay, and a few weeks later the interior surface of the immense tube was perfectly
cylindrical, and the bore had acquired a high polish.
At last, on the 22nd of September, less than a year after the Barbicane communication, the
enormous weapon, raised by means of delicate instruments, and quite vertical, was ready for
use. There was nothing but the moon to wait for, but they were sure she would not fail.
J.T. Maston’s joy knew no bounds, and he nearly had a frightful fall whilst looking down the
tube of 900 feet. Without Colonel Blomsberry’s right arm, which he had happily preserved,
the secretary of the Gun Club, like a modern Erostatus, would have found a grave in the
depths of the Columbiad.
The cannon was then finished; there was no longer any possible doubt as to its perfect
execution; so on the 6th of October Captain Nicholl cleared off his debt to President
Barbicane, who inscribed in his receipt-column a sum of 2,000 dollars. It may be believed
that the captain’s anger reached its highest pitch, and cost him an illness. Still there were yet
three bets of 3,000, 4,000, and 5,000 dollars, and if he only gained 2,000, his bargain would
not be a bad one, though not excellent. But money did not enter into his calculations, and the
success obtained by his rival in the casting of a cannon against which iron plates sixty feet
thick would not have resisted was a terrible blow to him.
Since the 23rd of September the inclosure on Stony Hill had been quite open to the public,
and the concourse of visitors will be readily imagined.
In fact, innumerable people from all points of the United States flocked to Florida. The town
of Tampa was prodigiously increased during that year, consecrated entirely to the works of
the Gun Club; it then comprised a population of 150,000 souls. After having surrounded Fort
Brooke in a network of streets it was now being lengthened out on that tongue of land which
separated the two harbours of Espiritu-Santo Bay; new quarters, new squares, and a whole
forest of houses had grown up in these formerly-deserted regions under the heat of the
American sun. Companies were formed for the erection of churches, schools, private
dwellings, and in less than a year the size of the town was increased tenfold.
It is well known that Yankees are born business men; everywhere that destiny takes them,
from the glacial to the torrid zone, their instinct for business is usefully exercised. That is
why simple visitors to Florida for the sole purpose of following the operations of the Gun
Club allowed themselves to be involved in commercial operations as soon as they were
installed in Tampa Town. The vessels freighted for the transport of the metal and the
workmen had given unparalleled activity to the port. Soon other vessels of every form and
tonnage, freighted with provisions and merchandise, ploughed the bay and the two harbours;
vast offices of shipbrokers and merchants were established in the town, and the Shipping
Gazette each day published fresh arrivals in the port of Tampa.
Whilst roads were multiplied round the town, in consequence of the prodigious increase in its
population and commerce, it was joined by railway to the Southern States of the Union. One
line of rails connected La Mobile to Pensacola, the great southern maritime arsenal; thence
from that important point it ran to Tallahassee. There already existed there a short line,
twenty-one miles long, to Saint Marks on the seashore. It was this loop-line that was
prolonged as far as Tampa Town, awakening in its passage the dead or sleeping portions of
Central Florida. Thus Tampa, thanks to these marvels of industry due to the idea born one
line day in the brain of one man, could take as its right the airs of a large town. They
surnamed it “Moon-City,” and the capital of Florida suffered an eclipse visible from all
points of the globe.
57
Every one will now understand why the rivalry was so great between Texas and Florida, and
the irritation of the Texicans when they saw their pretensions set aside by the Gun Club. In
their long-sighted sagacity they had foreseen what a country might gain from the experiment
attempted by Barbicane, and the wealth that would accompany such a cannon-shot. Texas
lost a vast centre of commerce, railways, and a considerable increase of population. All these
advantages had been given to that miserable Floridian peninsula, thrown like a pier between
the waves of the Gulf and those of the Atlantic Ocean. Barbicane, therefore, divided with
General Santa-Anna the Texan antipathy.
However, though given up to its commercial and industrial fury, the new population of
Tampa Town took care not to forget the interesting operations of the Gun Club. On the
contrary, the least details of the enterprise, every blow of the pickaxe, interested them. There
was an incessant flow of people to and from Tampa Town to Stony Hill a perfect
procession, or, better still, a pilgrimage.
It was already easy to foresee that the day of the experiment the concourse of spectators
would be counted by millions, for they came already from all points of the earth to the narrow
peninsula. Europe was emigrating to America.
But until then, it must be acknowledged, the curiosity of the numerous arrivals had only been
moderately satisfied. Many counted upon seeing the casting who only saw the smoke from it.
This was not much for hungry eyes, but Barbicane would allow no one to see that operation.
Thereupon ensued grumbling, discontent, and murmurs; they blamed the president for what
they considered dictatorial conduct. His act was stigmatised as “un-American.” There was
nearly a riot round Stony Hill, but Barbicane was not to be moved. When, however, the
Columbiad was quite finished, this state of closed doors could no longer be kept up; besides,
it would have been in bad taste, and even imprudent, to offend public opinion. Barbicane,
therefore, opened the inclosure to all comers; but, in accordance with his practical character,
he determined to coin money out of the public curiosity.
It was, indeed, something to even be allowed to see this immense Columbiad, but to descend
into its depths seemed to the Americans the ne plus ultra of earthly felicity. In consequence
there was not one visitor who was not willing to give himself the pleasure of visiting the
interior of this metallic abyss. Baskets hung from steam-cranes allowed them to satisfy their
curiosity. It became a perfect mania. Women, children, and old men all made it their business
to penetrate the mysteries of the colossal gun. The price for the descent was fixed at five
dollars a head, and, notwithstanding this high charge, during the two months that preceded
the experiment, the influx of visitors allowed the Gun Club to pocket nearly 500,000 dollars!
It need hardly be said that the first visitors to the Columbiad were the members of the Gun
Club. This privilege was justly accorded to that illustrious body. The ceremony of reception
took place on the 25th of September. A basket of honour took down the president, J.T.
Maston, Major Elphinstone, General Morgan, Colonel Blomsberry, and other members of the
Gun Club, ten in all. How hot they were at the bottom of that long metal tube! They were
nearly stifled, but how delightful how exquisite! A table had been laid for ten on the
massive stone which formed the bottom of the Columbiad, and was lighted by a jet of electric
light as bright as day itself. Numerous exquisite dishes, that seemed to descend from heaven,
were successively placed before the guests, and the richest wines of France flowed profusely
during this splendid repast, given 900 feet below the surface of the earth!
The festival was a gay, not to say a noisy one. Toasts were given and replied to. They drank
to the earth and her satellite, to the Gun Club, the Union, the Moon, Diana, Phoebe, Selene,
“the peaceful courier of the night.” All the hurrahs, carried up by the sonorous waves of the
58
immense acoustic tube, reached its mouth with a noise of thunder; then the multitude round
Stony Hill heartily united their shouts to those of the ten revellers hidden from sight in the
depths of the gigantic Columbiad.
J.T. Maston could contain himself no longer. Whether he shouted or ate, gesticulated or
talked most would be difficult to determine. Any way he would not have given up his place
for an empire, “not even if the cannon loaded, primed, and fired at that very moment were
to blow him in pieces into the planetary universe.”
59
XVII. A Telegram
The great work undertaken by the Gun Club was now virtually ended, and yet two months
would still elapse before the day the projectile would start for the moon. These two months
would seem as long as two years to the universal impatience. Until then the smallest details
of each operation had appeared in the newspapers every day, and were eagerly devoured by
the public, but now it was to be feared that this “interest dividend” would be much
diminished, and every one was afraid of no longer receiving his daily share of emotions.
They were all agreeably disappointed: the most unexpected, extraordinary, incredible, and
improbable incident happened in time to keep up the general excitement to its highest pitch.
On September 30th, at 3.47 p.m., a telegram, transmitted through the Atlantic Cable, arrived
at Tampa Town for President Barbicane.
He tore open the envelope and read the message, and, notwithstanding his great self-control,
his lips grew pale and his eyes dim as he read the telegram.
The following is the text of the message stored in the archives of the Gun Club: 
“France, Paris,
“September 30th, 4 a.m.
“Barbicane, Tampa Town, Florida, United States.
“Substitute a cylindro-conical projectile for your spherical shell. Shall go inside. Shall arrive
by steamer Atlanta.
“MICHEL ARDAN.”
60
XVIII. The Passenger Of The Atlanta
If this wonderful news, instead of coming by telegraph, had simply arrived by post and in a
sealed envelope if the French, Irish, Newfoundland, and American telegraph clerks had not
necessarily been acquainted with it Barbicane would not have hesitated for a moment. He
would have been quite silent about it for prudence’ sake, and in order not to throw discredit
on his work. This telegram might be a practical joke, especially as it came from a Frenchman.
What probability could there be that any man should conceive the idea of such a journey?
And if the man did exist was he not a madman who would have to be inclosed in a straitwaistcoat instead of in a cannon-ball?
But the message was known, and Michel Ardan’s proposition was already all over the States
of the Union, so Barbicane had no reason for silence. He therefore called together his
colleagues then in Tampa Town, and, without showing what he thought about it or saying a
word about the degree of credibility the telegram deserved, he read coldly the laconic text.
“Not possible!” ”Unheard of!” ”They are laughing at us!” ”Ridiculous!” ”Absurd!”
Every sort of expression for doubt, incredulity, and folly was heard for some minutes with
accompaniment of appropriate gestures. J.T. Maston alone uttered the words: 
“That’s an idea!” he exclaimed.
“Yes,” answered the major, “but if people have such ideas as that they ought not to think of
putting them into execution.”
“Why not?” quickly answered the secretary of the Gun Club, ready for an argument. But the
subject was let drop.
In the meantime Michel Ardan’s name was already going about Tampa Town. Strangers and
natives talked and joked together, not about the European evidently a mythical personage 
but about J.T. Maston, who had the folly to believe in his existence. When Barbicane
proposed to send a projectile to the moon every one thought the enterprise natural and
practicable a simple affair of ballistics. But that a reasonable being should offer to go the
journey inside the projectile was a farce, or, to use a familiar Americanism, it was all
“humbug.”
This laughter lasted till evening throughout the Union, an unusual thing in a country where
any impossible enterprise finds adepts and partisans.
Still Michel Ardan’s proposition did not fail to awaken a certain emotion in many minds.
“They had not thought of such a thing.” How many things denied one day had become
realities the next! Why should not this journey be accomplished one day or another? But, any
way, the man who would run such a risk must be a madman, and certainly, as his project
could not be taken seriously, he would have done better to be quiet about it, instead of
troubling a whole population with such ridiculous trash.
But, first of all, did this personage really exist? That was the great question. The name of
“Michel Ardan” was not altogether unknown in America. It belonged to a European much
talked about for his audacious enterprises. Then the telegram sent all across the depths of the
Atlantic, the designation of the ship upon which the Frenchman had declared he had taken his
passage, the date assigned for his arrival all these circumstances gave to the proposition a
certain air of probability. They were obliged to disburden their minds about it. Soon these
isolated individuals formed into groups, the groups became condensed under the action of
61
curiosity like atoms by virtue of molecular attraction, and the result was a compact crowd
going towards President Barbicane’s dwelling.
The president, since the arrival of the message, had not said what he thought about it; he had
let J.T. Maston express his opinions without manifesting either approbation or blame. He kept
quiet, proposing to await events, but he had not taken public impatience into consideration,
and was not very pleased at the sight of the population of Tampa Town assembled under his
windows. Murmurs, cries, and vociferations soon forced him to appear. It will be seen that he
had all the disagreeables as well as the duties of a public man.
He therefore appeared; silence was made, and a citizen asked him the following question: 
”Is the person designated in the telegram as Michel Ardan on his way to America or not?”
“Gentlemen,” answered Barbicane, “I know no more than you.”
“We must get to know,” exclaimed some impatient voices.
“Time will inform us,” answered the president coldly.
“Time has no right to keep a whole country in suspense,” answered the orator. “Have you
altered your plans for the projectile as the telegram demanded?”
“Not yet, gentlemen; but you are right, we must have recourse to the telegraph that has
caused all this emotion.”
“To the telegraph-office!” cried the crowd.
Barbicane descended into the street, and, heading the immense assemblage, he went towards
the telegraph-office.
A few minutes afterwards a telegram was on its way to the underwriters at Liverpool, asking
for an answer to the following questions: 
“What sort of vessel is the Atlanta? When did she leave Europe? Had she a Frenchman
named Michel Ardan on board?”
Two hours afterwards Barbicane received such precise information that doubt was no longer
possible.
“The steamer Atlanta, from Liverpool, set sail on October 2nd for Tampa Town, having on
board a Frenchman inscribed in the passengers’ book as Michel Ardan.”
At this confirmation of the first telegram the eyes of the president were lighted up with a
sudden flame; he clenched his hands, and was heard to mutter 
“It is true, then! It is possible, then! the Frenchman does exist! and in a fortnight he will be
here! But he is a madman! I never can consent.”
And yet the very same evening he wrote to the firm of Breadwill and Co. begging them to
suspend the casting of the projectile until fresh orders.
Now how can the emotion be described which took possession of the whole of America? The
effect of the Barbicane proposition was surpassed tenfold; what the newspapers of the Union
said, the way they accepted the news, and how they chanted the arrival of this hero from the
old continent; how to depict the feverish agitation in which every one lived, counting the
hours, minutes, and seconds; how to give even a feeble idea of the effect of one idea upon so
many heads; how to show every occupation being given up for a single preoccupation, work
stopped, commerce suspended, vessels, ready to start, waiting in the ports so as not to miss
the arrival of the Atlanta, every species of conveyance arriving full and returning empty, the
bay of Espiritu-Santo incessantly ploughed by steamers, packet-boats, pleasure-yachts, and
62
fly-boats of all dimensions; how to denominate in numbers the thousands of curious people
who in a fortnight increased the population of Tampa Town fourfold, and were obliged to
encamp under tents like an army in campaign all this is a task above human force, and
could not be undertaken without rashness.
At 9 a.m. on the 20th of October the semaphores of the Bahama Channel signalled thick
smoke on the horizon. Two hours later a large steamer exchanged signals with them. The
name Atlanta was immediately sent to Tampa Town. At 4 p.m. the English vessel entered the
bay of Espiritu-Santo. At 5 p.m. she passed the entrance to Hillisboro Harbour, and at 6 p.m.
weighed anchor in the port of Tampa Town.
The anchor had not reached its sandy bed before 500 vessels surrounded the Atlanta and the
steamer was taken by assault. Barbicane was the first on deck, and in a voice the emotion of
which he tried in vain to suppress 
“Michel Ardan!” he exclaimed.
“Present!” answered an individual mounted on the poop.
Barbicane, with his arms crossed, questioning eyes, and silent mouth, looked fixedly at the
passenger of the Atlanta.
He was a man forty-two years of age, tall, but already rather stooping, like caryatides which
support balconies on their shoulders. His large head shook every now and then a shock of red
hair like a lion’s mane; a short face, wide forehead, a moustache bristling like a cat’s
whiskers, and little bunches of yellow hair on the middle of his cheeks, round and rather
wild-looking, short-sighted eyes completed this eminently feline physiognomy. But the nose
was boldly cut, the mouth particularly humane, the forehead high, intelligent, and ploughed
like a field that was never allowed to remain fallow. Lastly, a muscular body well poised on
long limbs, muscular arms, powerful and well-set levers, and a decided gait made a solidly
built fellow of this European, “rather wrought than cast,” to borrow one of his expressions
from metallurgic art.
The disciples of Lavater or Gratiolet would have easily deciphered in the cranium and
physiognomy of this personage indisputable signs of combativity that is to say, of courage
in danger and tendency to overcome obstacles, those of benevolence, and a belief in the
marvellous, an instinct that makes many natures dwell much on superhuman things; but, on
the other hand, the bumps of acquisivity, the need of possessing and acquiring, were
absolutely wanting.
To put the finishing touches to the physical type of the passenger of the Atlanta, his garments
wide, loose, and flowing, open cravat, wide collar, and cuffs always unbuttoned, through
which came nervous hands. People felt that even in the midst of winter and dangers that man
was never cold.
On the deck of the steamer, amongst the crowd, he bustled about, never still for a moment,
“dragging his anchors,” in nautical speech, gesticulating, making friends with everybody, and
biting his nails nervously. He was one of those original beings whom the Creator invents in a
moment of fantasy, and of whom He immediately breaks the cast.
In fact, the character of Michel Ardan offered a large field for physiological analysis. This
astonishing man lived in a perpetual disposition to hyperbole, and had not yet passed the age
of superlatives; objects depicted themselves on the retina of his eye with exaggerated
dimensions; from thence an association of gigantic ideas; he saw everything on a large scale
except difficulties and men.
63
He was besides of a luxuriant nature, an artist by instinct, and witty fellow; he loved
arguments ad hominem, and defended the weak side tooth and nail.
Amongst other peculiarities he gave himself out as “sublimely ignorant,” like Shakspeare,
and professed supreme contempt for all savants, “people,” said he, “who only score our
points.” He was, in short, a Bohemian of the country of brains, adventurous but not an
adventurer, a harebrained fellow, a Phaeton running away with the horses of the sun, a kind
of Icarus with relays of wings. He had a wonderful facility for getting into scrapes, and an
equally wonderful facility for getting out of them again, falling on his feet like a cat.
In short, his motto was, “Whatever it may cost!” and the love of the impossible his “ruling
passion,” according to Pope’s fine expression.
But this enterprising fellow had the defects of his qualities. Who risks nothing wins nothing,
it is said. Ardan often risked much and got nothing. He was perfectly disinterested and
chivalric; he would not have signed the death-warrant of his worst enemy, and would have
sold himself into slavery to redeem a negro.
In France and Europe everybody knew this brilliant, bustling person. Did he not get talked of
ceaselessly by the hundred voices of Fame, hoarse in his service? Did he not live in a glass
house, taking the entire universe as confidant of his most intimate secrets? But he also
possessed an admirable collection of enemies amongst those he had cuffed and wounded
whilst using his elbows to make a passage in the crowd.
Still he was generally liked and treated like a spoiled child. Every one was interested in his
bold enterprises, and followed them with uneasy mind. He was known to be so imprudent!
When some friend wished to stop him by predicting an approaching catastrophe, “The forest
is only burnt by its own trees,” he answered with an amiable smile, not knowing that he was
quoting the prettiest of Arabian proverbs.
Such was the passenger of the Atlanta, always in a bustle, always boiling under the action of
inward fire, always moved, not by what he had come to do in America he did not even
think about it but on account of his feverish organisation. If ever individuals offered a
striking contrast they were the Frenchman Michel Ardan and the Yankee Barbicane, both,
however, enterprising, bold, and audacious, each in his own way.
Barbicane’s contemplation of his rival was quickly interrupted by the cheers of the crowd.
These cries became even so frantic and the enthusiasm took such a personal form that Michel
Ardan, after having shaken a thousand hands in which he nearly left his ten fingers, was
obliged to take refuge in his cabin.
Barbicane followed him without having uttered a word.
“You are Barbicane?” Michel Ardan asked him as soon as they were alone, and in the same
tone as he would have spoken to a friend of twenty years’ standing.
“Yes,” answered the president of the Gun Club.
“Well, good morning, Barbicane. How are you? Very well? That’s right! that’s right!”
“Then,” said Barbicane, without further preliminary, “you have decided to go?”
“Quite decided.”
“Nothing will stop you?”
“Nothing. Have you altered your projectile as I told you in my message?”
64
“I waited till you came. But,” asked Barbicane, insisting once more, “you have quite
reflected?”
“Reflected! have I any time to lose? I find the occasion to go for a trip to the moon, I profit
by it, and that is all. It seems to me that does not want so much reflection.”
Barbicane looked eagerly at the man who spoke of his project of journey with so much
carelessness, and with such absence of anxiety.
“But at least,” he said, “you have some plan, some means of execution?”
“Excellent means. But allow me to tell you one thing. I like to say my say once and for all,
and to everybody, and to hear no more about it. Then, unless you can think of something
better, call together your friends, your colleagues, all the town, all Florida, all America if you
like, and to-morrow I shall be ready to state my means of execution, and answer any
objections, whatever they may be. Will that do?”
“Yes, that will do,” answered Barbicane.
Whereupon the president left the cabin, and told the crowd about Michel Ardan’s proposition.
His words were received with great demonstrations of joy. That cut short all difficulties. The
next day every one could contemplate the European hero at their ease. Still some of the most
obstinate spectators would not leave the deck of the Atlanta; they passed the night on board.
Amongst others, J.T. Maston had screwed his steel hook into the combing of the poop, and it
would have taken the capstan to get it out again.
“He is a hero! a hero!” cried he in every tone, “and we are only old women compared to that
European!”
As to the president, after having requested the spectators to withdraw, he re-entered the
passenger’s cabin, and did not leave it till the bell of the steamer rang out the midnight
quarter.
But then the two rivals in popularity shook each other warmly by the hand, and separated
friends.
65
XIX. A Meeting
The next day the sun did not rise early enough to satisfy public impatience. Barbicane,
fearing that indiscreet questions would be put to Michel Ardan, would like to have reduced
his auditors to a small number of adepts, to his colleagues for instance. But it was as easy as
to dam up the Falls at Niagara. He was, therefore, obliged to renounce his project, and let his
friend run all the risks of a public lecture. The new Town Hall of Tampa Town,
notwithstanding its colossal dimensions, was considered insufficient for the occasion, which
had assumed the proportions of a public meeting.
The place chosen was a vast plain, situated outside the town. In a few hours they succeeded
in sheltering it from the rays of the sun. The ships of the port, rich in canvas, furnished the
necessary accessories for a colossal tent. Soon an immense sky of cloth was spread over the
calcined plain, and defended it against the heat of the day. There 300,000 persons stood and
braved a stifling temperature for several hours whilst awaiting the Frenchman’s arrival. Of
that crowd of spectators one-third alone could see and hear; a second third saw badly, and did
not hear. As to the remaining third, it neither heard nor saw, though it was not the least eager
to applaud.
At three o’clock Michel Ardan made his appearance, accompanied by the principal members
of the Gun Club. He gave his right arm to President Barbicane, and his left to J.T. Maston,
more radiant than the midday sun, and nearly as ruddy.
Ardan mounted the platform, from which his eyes extended over a forest of black hats. He
did not seem in the least embarrassed; he did not pose; he was at home there, gay, familiar,
and amiable. To the cheers that greeted him he answered by a gracious bow; then with his
hand asked for silence, began to speak in English, and expressed himself very correctly in
these terms: 
“Gentlemen,” said he, “although it is very warm, I intend to keep you a few minutes to give
you some explanation of the projects which have appeared to interest you. I am neither an
orator nor a savant, and I did not count upon having to speak in public; but my friend
Barbicane tells me it would give you pleasure, so I do it. Then listen to me with your 600,000
ears, and please to excuse the faults of the orator.”
This unceremonious beginning was much admired by the audience, who expressed their
satisfaction by an immense murmur of applause.
“Gentlemen,” said he, “no mark of approbation or dissent is prohibited. That settled, I
continue. And, first of all, do not forget that you have to do with an ignorant man, but his
ignorance goes far enough to ignore difficulties. It has, therefore, appeared a simple, natural,
and easy thing to him to take his passage in a projectile and to start for the moon. That
journey would be made sooner or later, and as to the mode of locomotion adopted, it simply
follows the law of progress. Man began by travelling on all fours, then one fine day he went
on two feet, then in a cart, then in a coach, then on a railway. Well, the projectile is the
carriage of the future, and, to speak the truth, planets are only projectiles, simple cannon-balls
hurled by the hand of the Creator. But to return to our vehicle. Some of you, gentlemen, may
think that the speed it will travel at is excessive nothing of the kind. All the planets go
faster, and the earth itself in its movement round the sun carries us along three times as fast.
Here are some examples. Only I ask your permission to express myself in leagues, for
66
American measures are not very familiar to me, and I fear getting muddled in my
calculations.”
The demand appeared quite simple, and offered no difficulty. The orator resumed his speech.
“The following, gentlemen, is the speed of the different planets. I am obliged to acknowledge
that, notwithstanding my ignorance, I know this small astronomical detail exactly, but in two
minutes you will be as learned as I. Learn, then, that Neptune goes at the rate of 5,000
leagues an hour; Uranus, 7,000; Saturn, 8,858; Jupiter, 11,675; Mars, 22,011; the earth,
27,500; Venus, 32,190; Mercury, 52,520; some comets, 14,000 leagues in their perihelion!
As to us, veritable idlers, people in no hurry, our speed does not exceed 9,900 leagues, and it
will go on decreasing! I ask you if there is anything to wonder at, and if it is not evident that
it will be surpassed some day by still greater speeds, of which light or electricity will
probably be the mechanical agents?”
No one seemed to doubt this affirmation.
“Dear hearers,” he resumed, “according to certain narrow minds that is the best
qualification for them humanity is inclosed in a Popilius circle which it cannot break open,
and is condemned to vegetate upon this globe without ever flying towards the planetary
shores! Nothing of the kind! We are going to the moon, we shall go to the planets, we shall
go to the stars as we now go from Liverpool to New York, easily, rapidly, surely, and the
atmospheric ocean will be as soon crossed as the oceans of the earth! Distance is only a
relative term, and will end by being reduced to zero.”
The assembly, though greatly in favour of the French hero, was rather staggered by this
audacious theory. Michel Ardan appeared to see it.
“You do not seem convinced, my worthy hosts,” he continued with an amiable smile. “Well,
let us reason a little. Do you know how long it would take an express train to reach the moon?
Three hundred days. Not more. A journey of 86,410 leagues, but what is that? Not even nine
times round the earth, and there are very few sailors who have not done that during their
existence. Think, I shall be only ninety-eight hours on the road! Ah, you imagine that the
moon is a long way from the earth, and that one must think twice before attempting the
adventure! But what would you say if I were going to Neptune, which gravitates at
1,147,000,000 leagues from the sun? That is a journey that very few people could go, even if
it only cost a farthing a mile! Even Baron Rothschild would not have enough to take his
ticket!”
This argument seemed greatly to please the assembly; besides, Michel Ardan, full of his
subject, grew superbly eloquent; he felt he was listened to, and resumed with admirable
assurance 
“Well, my friends, this distance from Neptune to the sun is nothing compared to that of the
stars, some of which are billions of leagues from the sun! And yet people speak of the
distance that separates the planets from the sun! Do you know what I think of this universe
that begins with the sun and ends at Neptune? Should you like to know my theory? It is a
very simple one. According to my opinion, the solar universe is one solid homogeneous
mass; the planets that compose it are close together, crowd one another, and the space
between them is only the space that separates the molecules of the most compact metal 
silver, iron, or platinum! I have, therefore, the right to affirm, and I will repeat it with a
conviction you will all share distance is a vain word; distance does not exist!”
“Well said! Bravo! Hurrah!” cried the assembly with one voice, electrified by the gesture and
accent of the orator, and the boldness of his conceptions.
67
“No!” cried J.T. Maston, more energetically than the others; “distance does not exist!”
And, carried away by the violence of his movements and emotions he could hardly contain,
he nearly fell from the top of the platform to the ground. But he succeeded in recovering his
equilibrium, and thus avoided a fall that would have brutally proved distance not to be a vain
word. Then the speech of the distinguished orator resumed its course.
“My friends,” said he, “I think that this question is now solved. If I have not convinced you
all it is because I have been timid in my demonstrations, feeble in my arguments, and you
must set it down to my theoretic ignorance. However that may be, I repeat, the distance from
the earth to her satellite is really very unimportant and unworthy to occupy a serious mind. I
do not think I am advancing too much in saying that soon a service of trains will be
established by projectiles, in which the journey from the earth to the moon will be
comfortably accomplished. There will be no shocks nor running off the lines to fear, and the
goal will be reached rapidly, without fatigue, in a straight line, ‘as the crow flies.’ Before
twenty years are over, half the earth will have visited the moon!”
“Three cheers for Michel Ardan!” cried the assistants, even those least convinced.
“Three cheers for Barbicane!” modestly answered the orator.
This act of gratitude towards the promoter of the enterprise was greeted with unanimous
applause.
“Now, my friends,” resumed Michel Ardan, “if you have any questions to ask me you will
evidently embarrass me, but still I will endeavour to answer you.”
Until now the president of the Gun Club had reason to be very satisfied with the discussion. It
had rolled upon speculative theories, upon which Michel Ardan, carried away by his lively
imagination, had shown himself very brilliant. He must, therefore, be prevented from
deviating towards practical questions, which he would doubtless not come out of so well.
Barbicane made haste to speak, and asked his new friend if he thought that the moon or the
planets were inhabited.
“That is a great problem, my worthy president,” answered the orator, smiling; “still, if I am
not mistaken, men of great intelligence Plutarch, Swedenborg, Bernardin de Saint-Pierre,
and many others answered in the affirmative. If I answered from a natural philosophy point
of view I should do the same I should say to myself that nothing useless exists in this world,
and, answering your question by another, friend Barbicane, I should affirm that if the planets
are inhabitable, either they are inhabited, they have been, or they will be.”
“Very well,” cried the first ranks of spectators, whose opinion had the force of law for the
others.
“It is impossible to answer with more logic and justice,” said the president of the Gun Club.
“The question, therefore, comes to this: ‘Are the planets inhabitable?’ I think so, for my
part.”
“And I I am certain of it,” answered Michel Ardan.
“Still,” replied one of the assistants, “there are arguments against the inhabitability of the
worlds. In most of them it is evident that the principles of life must be modified. Thus, only
to speak of the planets, the people must be burnt up in some and frozen in others according as
they are a long or short distance from the sun.”
“I regret,” answered Michel Ardan, “not to know my honourable opponent personally. His
objection has its value, but I think it may be combated with some success, like all those of
68
which the habitability of worlds has been the object. If I were a physician I should say that if
there were less caloric put in motion in the planets nearest to the sun, and more, on the
contrary, in the distant planets, this simple phenomenon would suffice to equalise the heat
and render the temperature of these worlds bearable to beings organised like we are. If I were
a naturalist I should tell him, after many illustrious savants, that Nature furnishes us on earth
with examples of animals living in very different conditions of habitability; that fish breathe
in a medium mortal to the other animals; that amphibians have a double existence difficult to
explain; that certain inhabitants of the sea live in the greatest depths, and support there,
without being crushed, pressures of fifty or sixty atmospheres; that some aquatic insects,
insensible to the temperature, are met with at the same time in springs of boiling water and in
the frozen plains of the Polar Ocean in short, there are in nature many means of action,
often incomprehensible, but no less real. If I were a chemist I should say that aërolites 
bodies evidently formed away from our terrestrial globe have when analysed, revealed
indisputable traces of carbon, a substance that owes its origin solely to organised beings, and
which, according to Reichenbach’s experiments, must necessarily have been ‘animalised.’
Lastly, if I were a theologian I should say that Divine Redemption, according to St. Paul,
seems applicable not only to the earth but to all the celestial bodies. But I am neither a
theologian, chemist, naturalist, nor natural philosopher. So, in my perfect ignorance of the
great laws that rule the universe, I can only answer, ‘I do not know if the heavenly bodies are
inhabited, and, as I do not know, I am going to see!’”
Did the adversary of Michel Ardan’s theories hazard any further arguments? It is impossible
to say, for the frantic cries of the crowd would have prevented any opinion from being
promulgated. When silence was again restored, even in the most distant groups, the
triumphant orator contented himself with adding the following considerations: 
“You will think, gentlemen, that I have hardly touched upon this grave question. I am not
here to give you an instructive lecture upon this vast subject. There is another series of
arguments in favour of the heavenly bodies being inhabited; I do not look upon that. Allow
me only to insist upon one point. To the people who maintain that the planets are not
inhabited you must answer, ‘You may be right if it is demonstrated that the earth is the best
of possible worlds; but it is not so, notwithstanding Voltaire.’ It has only one satellite, whilst
Jupiter, Uranus, Saturn, and Neptune have several at their service, an advantage that is not to
be disdained. But that which now renders the earth an uncomfortable place of abode is the
inclination of its axis upon its orbit. Hence the inequality of day and night; hence the
unfortunate diversity of seasons. Upon our miserable spheroid it is always either too warm or
too cold; we are frozen in winter and roasted in summer; it is the planet of colds, rheumatism,
and consumption, whilst on the surface of Jupiter, for instance, where the axis has only a very
slight inclination, the inhabitants can enjoy invariable temperature. There is the perpetual
spring, summer, autumn, and winter zone; each ‘Jovian’ may choose the climate that suits
him, and may shelter himself all his life from the variations of the temperature. You will
doubtless agree to this superiority of Jupiter over our planet without speaking of its years,
which each lasts twelve years! What is more, it is evident to me that, under these auspices,
and under such marvellous conditions of existence, the inhabitants of that fortunate world are
superior beings that savants are more learned, artists more artistic, the wicked less wicked,
and the good are better. Alas! what is wanting to our spheroid to reach this perfection is very
little! an axis of rotation less inclined on the plane of its orbit.”
“Well!” cried an impetuous voice, “let us unite our efforts, invent machines, and rectify the
earth’s axis!”
69
Thunders of applause greeted this proposition, the author of which could be no other than J.T.
Maston. It is probable that the fiery secretary had been carried away by his instincts as
engineer to venture such a proposition; but it must be said, for it is the truth, many
encouraged him with their cries, and doubtless, if they had found the resting-point demanded
by Archimedes, the Americans would have constructed a lever capable of raising the world
and redressing its axis. But this point was wanting to these bold mechanicians.
Nevertheless, this eminently practical idea had enormous success: the discussion was
suspended for a good quarter of an hour, and long, very long afterwards, they talked in the
United States of America of the proposition so energetically enunciated by the perpetual
secretary of the Gun Club.
70
XX. Thrust And Parry
This incident seemed to have terminated the discussion, but when the agitation had subsided
these words were heard uttered in a loud and severe voice: 
“Now that the orator has allowed his fancy to roam, perhaps he would kindly go back to his
subject, pay less attention to theories, and discuss the practical part of his expedition.”
All eyes were turned towards the person who spoke thus. He was a thin, dry-looking man,
with an energetic face and an American beard. By taking advantage of the agitation in the
assembly from time to time he had gained, by degrees, the front row of spectators. There,
with his arms crossed, his eyes brilliant and bold, he stared imperturbably at the hero of the
meeting. After having asked his question he kept silence, and did not seem disturbed by the
thousands of eyes directed towards him nor by the disapproving murmur excited by his
words. The answer being delayed he again put the question with the same clear and precise
accent; then he added 
“We are here to discuss the moon, not the earth.”
“You are right, sir,” answered Michel Ardan, “the discussion has wandered from the point;
we will return to the moon.”
“Sir,” resumed the unknown man, “you pretend that our satellite is inhabited. So far so good;
but if Selenites do exist they certainly live without breathing, for I tell you the fact for your
good there is not the least particle of air on the surface of the moon.”
At this affirmation Ardan shook his red mane; he understood that a struggle was coming with
this man on the real question. He looked at him fixedly in his turn, and said 
“Ah! there is no air in the moon! And who says so, pray?”
“The savants.”
“Indeed?”
“Indeed.”
“Sir,” resumed Michel, “joking apart, I have a profound respect for savants who know, but a
profound contempt for savants who do not know.”
“Do you know any who belong to the latter category?”
“Yes; in France there is one who maintains that, ‘mathematically,’ a bird cannot fly, and
another who demonstrates that a fish is not made to live in water.”
“There is no question of those two, sir, and I can quote in support of my proposition names
that you will not object to.”
“Then, sir, you would greatly embarrass a poor ignorant man like me!”
“Then why do you meddle with scientific questions which you have never studied?” asked
the unknown brutally.
“Why?” answered Ardan; “because the man who does not suspect danger is always brave! I
know nothing, it is true, but it is precisely my weakness that makes my strength.”
“Your weakness goes as far as madness,” exclaimed the unknown in a bad-tempered tone.
“So much the better,” replied the Frenchman, “if my madness takes me to the moon!”
71
Barbicane and his colleagues stared at the intruder who had come so boldly to stand in the
way of their enterprise. None of them knew him, and the president, not reassured upon the
upshot of such a discussion, looked at his new friend with some apprehension. The assembly
was attentive and slightly uneasy, for this struggle called attention to the dangers and
impossibilities of the expedition.
“Sir,” resumed Michel Ardan’s adversary, “the reasons that prove the absence of all
atmosphere round the moon are numerous and indisputable. I may say, even, that, à priori if
that atmosphere had ever existed, it must have been drawn away by the earth, but I would
rather oppose you with incontestable facts.”
“Oppose, sir,” answered Michel Ardan, with perfect gallantry oppose as much as you like.”
“You know,” said the unknown, “that when the sun’s rays traverse a medium like air they are
deviated from a straight line, or, in other words, they are refracted. Well, when stars are
occulted by the moon their rays, on grazing the edge of her disc, do not show the least
deviation nor offer the slightest indication of refraction. It follows, therefore, that the moon
can have no atmosphere.”
Every one looked at the Frenchman, for, this once admitted, the consequences were rigorous.
“In fact,” answered Michel Ardan, “that is your best if not only argument, and a savant,
perhaps, would be embarrassed to answer it. I can only tell you that this argument has no
absolute value because it supposes the angular diameter of the moon to be perfectly
determined, which it is not. But let us waive that, and tell me, my dear sir, if you admit the
existence of volcanoes on the surface of the moon.”
“Extinct volcanoes, yes; volcanoes in eruption, no.”
“For the sake of argument let us suppose that these volcanoes have been in eruption for a
certain period.”
“That is certain, but as they can themselves furnish the oxygen necessary for combustion the
fact of their eruption does not in the least prove the presence of a lunar atmosphere.”
“We will pass on, then,” answered Michel Ardan, “and leave this series of argument and
arrive at direct observation. But I warn you that I am going to quote names.”
“Very well.”
“In 1715 the astronomers Louville and Halley, observing the eclipse of the 3rd of May,
remarked certain fulminations of a remarkable nature. These jets of light, rapid and frequent,
were attributed by them to storms in the atmosphere of the moon.”
“In 1715,” replied the unknown, “the astronomers Louville and Halley took for lunar
phenomena phenomena purely terrestrial, such as meteoric or other bodies which are
generated in our own atmosphere. That was the scientific aspect of these facts, and I go with
it.”
“Let us pass on again,” answered Ardan, without being confused by the reply. “Did not
Herschel, in 1787, observe a great number of luminous points on the surface of the moon?”
“Certainly; but without explaining the origin of these luminous points. Herschel himself did
not thereby conclude the necessity of a lunar atmosphere.”
“Well answered,” said Michel Ardan, complimenting his adversary; “I see that you are well
up in selenography.”
72
“Yes, sir; and I may add that the most skilful observers, MM. Boeer and Moedler, agree that
air is absolutely wanting on the moon’s surface.”
A movement took place amongst the audience, who appeared struck by the arguments of this
singular personage.
“We will pass on again,” answered Michel Ardan, with the greatest calmness, “and arrive
now at an important fact. A skilful French astronomer, M. Laussedat, whilst observing the
eclipse of July 18th, 1860, proved that the horns of the solar crescent were rounded and
truncated. Now this appearance could only have been produced by a deviation of the solar
rays in traversing the atmosphere of the moon. There is no other possible explanation of the
fact.”
“But is this fact authenticated?”
“It is absolutely certain.”
An inverse movement brought back the audience to the side of their favourite hero, whose
adversary remained silent.
Ardan went on speaking without showing any vanity about his last advantage; he said
simply 
“You see, therefore, my dear sir, that it cannot be positively affirmed that there is no
atmosphere on the surface of the moon. This atmosphere is probably not dense, but science
now generally admits that it exists.”
“Not upon the mountains,” replied the unknown, who would not give in.
“No, but in the depths of the valleys, and it is not more than some hundreds of feet deep.”
“Any way you will do well to take your precautions, for the air will be terribly rarefied.”
“Oh, there will always be enough for one man. Besides, once delivered up there, I shall do
my best to economise it and only to breathe it on great occasions.”
A formidable burst of laughter saluted the mysterious interlocutor, who looked round the
assembly daring it proudly.
“Then,” resumed Michel Ardan, carelessly, “as we are agreed upon the presence of some
atmosphere, we are forced to admit the presence of some water a consequence I am
delighted with, for my part. Besides, I have another observation to make. We only know one
side of the moon’s disc, and if there is little air on that side there may be much on the other.”
“How so?”
“Because the moon under the action of terrestrial attraction has assumed the form of an egg,
of which we see the small end. Hence the consequence due to the calculations of Hausen, that
its centre of gravity is situated in the other hemisphere. Hence this conclusion that all the
masses of air and water have been drawn to the other side of our satellite in the first days of
the creation.”
“Pure fancies,” exclaimed the unknown.
“No, pure theories based upon mechanical laws, and it appears difficult to me to refute them.
I make appeal to this assembly and put it to the vote to know if life such as it exists upon
earth is possible on the surface of the moon?”
73
Three hundred thousand hearers applauded this proposition. Michel Ardan’s adversary
wished to speak again, but he could not make himself heard. Cries and threats were hailed
upon him.
“Enough, enough!” said some.
“Turn him out!” repeated others.
But he, holding on to the platform, did not move, and let the storm pass by. It might have
assumed formidable proportions if Michel Ardan had not appeased it by a gesture. He was
too chivalrous to abandon his contradicter in such an extremity.
“You wish to add a few words?” he asked, in the most gracious tone.
“Yes, a hundred! a thousand!” answered the unknown, carried away, “or rather no, one only!
To persevere in your enterprise you must be ”
“Imprudent! How can you call me that when I have asked for a cylindro-conical bullet from
my friend Barbicane so as not to turn round on the road like a squirrel?”
“But, unfortunate man! the fearful shock will smash you to pieces when you start.”
“You have there put your finger upon the real and only difficulty; but I have too good an
opinion of the industrial genius of the Americans to believe that they will not overcome that
difficulty.”
“But the heat developed by the speed of the projectile whilst crossing the beds of air?”
“Oh, its sides are thick, and I shall so soon pass the atmosphere.”
“But provisions? water?”
“I have calculated that I could carry enough for one year, and I shall only be four days
going.”
“But air to breathe on the road?”
“I shall make some by chemical processes.”
“But your fall upon the moon, supposing you ever get there?”
“It will be six times less rapid than a fall upon the earth, as attraction is six times less on the
surface of the moon.”
“But it still will be sufficient to smash you like glass.”
“What will prevent me delaying my fall by means of rockets conveniently placed and lighted
at the proper time?”
“But lastly, supposing that all difficulties be solved, all obstacles cleared away by uniting
every chance in your favour, admitting that you reach the moon safe and well, how shall you
come back?”
“I shall not come back.”
Upon this answer, which was almost sublime by reason of its simplicity, the assembly
remained silent. But its silence was more eloquent than its cries of enthusiasm would have
been. The unknown profited by it to protest one last time.
“You will infallibly kill yourself,” he cried, “and your death, which will be only a madman’s
death, will not even be useful to science.”
“Go on, most generous of men, for you prophesy in the most agreeable manner.”
74
“Ah, it is too much!” exclaimed Michel Ardan’s adversary, “and I do not know why I go on
with so childish a discussion. Go on with your mad enterprise as you like. It is not your
fault.”
“Fire away.”
“No, another must bear the responsibility of your acts.”
“Who is that, pray?” asked Michel Ardan in an imperious voice.
“The fool who has organised this attempt, as impossible as it is ridiculous.”
The attack was direct. Barbicane since the intervention of the unknown had made violent
efforts to contain himself and “consume his own smoke,” but upon seeing himself so
outrageously designated he rose directly and was going to walk towards his adversary, who
dared him to his face, when he felt himself suddenly separated from him.
The platform was lifted up all at once by a hundred vigorous arms, and the president of the
Gun Club was forced to share the honours of triumph with Michel Ardan. The platform was
heavy, but the bearers came in continuous relays, disputing, struggling, even fighting for the
privilege of lending the support of their shoulders to this manifestation.
However, the unknown did not take advantage of the tumult to leave the place. He kept in the
front row, his arms folded, still staring at President Barbicane.
The president did not lose sight of him either, and the eyes of these two men met like flaming
swords.
The cries of the immense crowds kept at their maximum of intensity during this triumphant
march. Michel Ardan allowed himself to be carried with evident pleasure.
Sometimes the platform pitched and tossed like a ship beaten by the waves. But the two
heroes of the meeting were good sailors, and their vessel safely arrived in the port of Tampa
Town.
Michel Ardan happily succeeded in escaping from his vigorous admirers. He fled to the
Franklin Hotel, quickly reached his room, and glided rapidly into bed whilst an army of
100,000 men watched under his windows.
In the meanwhile a short, grave, and decisive scene had taken place between the mysterious
personage and the president of the Gun Club.
Barbicane, liberated at last, went straight to his adversary.
“Come!” said he in a curt voice.
The stranger followed him on to the quay, and they were soon both alone at the entrance to a
wharf opening on to Jones’ Fall.
There these enemies, still unknown to one another, looked at each other.
“Who are you?” asked Barbicane.
“Captain Nicholl.”
“I thought so. Until now fate has never made you cross my path.”
“I crossed it of my own accord.”
“You have insulted me.”
“Publicly.”
75
“And you shall give me satisfaction for that insult.”
“Now, this minute.”
“No. I wish everything between us to be kept secret. There is a wood situated three miles
from Tampa Skersnaw Wood. Do you know it?”
“Yes.”
“Will you enter it to-morrow morning at five o’clock by one side?”
“Yes, if you will enter it by the other at the same time.”
“And you will not forget your rifle?” said Barbicane.
“Not more than you will forget yours,” answered Captain Nicholl.
After these words had been coldly pronounced the president of the Gun Club and the captain
separated. Barbicane returned to his dwelling; but, instead of taking some hours’ rest, he
passed the night in seeking means to avoid the shock of the projectile, and to solve the
difficult problem given by Michel Ardan at the meeting.
76
XXI. How A Frenchman Settles An Affair
Whilst the duel was being discussed between the president and the captain a terrible and
savage duel in which each adversary became a man-hunter Michel Ardan was resting after
the fatigues of his triumph. Resting is evidently not the right expression, for American beds
rival in hardness tables of marble or granite.
Ardan slept badly, turning over and over between the serviettes that served him for sheets,
and he was thinking of installing a more comfortable bed in his projectile when a violent
noise startled him from his slumbers. Thundering blows shook his door. They seemed to be
administered with an iron instrument. Shouts were heard in this racket, rather too early to be
agreeable.
“Open!” some one cried. “Open, for Heaven’s sake!”
There was no reason why Ardan should acquiesce in so peremptory a demand. Still he rose
and opened his door at the moment it was giving way under the efforts of the obstinate
visitor.
The secretary of the Gun Club bounded into the room. A bomb would not have entered with
less ceremony.
“Yesterday evening,” exclaimed J.T. Maston ex abrupto, “our president was publicly insulted
during the meeting! He has challenged his adversary, who is no other than Captain Nicholl!
They are going to fight this morning in Skersnaw Wood! I learnt it all from Barbicane
himself! If he is killed our project will be at an end! This duel must be prevented! Now one
man only can have enough empire over Barbicane to stop it, and that man is Michel Ardan.”
Whilst J.T. Maston was speaking thus, Michel Ardan, giving up interrupting him, jumped
into his vast trousers, and in less than two minutes after the two friends were rushing as fast
as they could go towards the suburbs of Tampa Town.
It was during this rapid course that Maston told Ardan the state of the case. He told him the
real causes of the enmity between Barbicane and Nicholl, how that enmity was of old date,
why until then, thanks to mutual friends, the president and the captain had never met; he
added that it was solely a rivalry between iron-plate and bullet; and, lastly, that the scene of
the meeting had only been an occasion long sought by Nicholl to satisfy an old grudge.
There is nothing more terrible than these private duels in America, during which the two
adversaries seek each other across thickets, and hunt each other like wild animals. It is then
that each must envy those marvellous qualities so natural to the Indians of the prairies, their
rapid intelligence, their ingenious ruse, their scent of the enemy. An error, a hesitation, a
wrong step, may cause death. In these meetings the Yankees are often accompanied by their
dogs, and both sportsmen and game go on for hours.
“What demons you are!” exclaimed Michel Ardan, when his companion had depicted the
scene with much energy.
“We are what we are,” answered J.T. Maston modestly; “but let us make haste.”
In vain did Michel Ardan and he rush across the plain still wet with dew, jump the creeks,
take the shortest cuts; they could not reach Skersnaw Wood before half-past five. Barbicane
must have entered it half-an-hour before.
There an old bushman was tying up faggots his axe had cut.
77
Maston ran to him crying 
“Have you seen a man enter the wood armed with a rifle? Barbicane, the president my best
friend?”
The worthy secretary of the Gun Club thought naïvely that all the world must know his
president. But the bushman did not seem to understand.
“A sportsman,” then said Ardan.
“A sportsman? Yes,” answered the bushman.
“Is it long since?”
“About an hour ago.”
“Too late!” exclaimed Maston.
“Have you heard any firing?” asked Michel Ardan.
“No.”
“Not one shot?”
“Not one. That sportsman does not seem to bag much game!”
“What shall we do?” said Maston.
“Enter the wood at the risk of catching a bullet not meant for us.”
“Ah!” exclaimed Maston, with an unmistakable accent, “I would rather have ten bullets in my
head than one in Barbicane’s head.”
“Go ahead, then!” said Ardan, pressing his companion’s hand.
A few seconds after the two companions disappeared in a copse. It was a dense thicket made
of huge cypresses, sycamores, tulip-trees, olives, tamarinds, oaks, and magnolias. The
different trees intermingled their branches in inextricable confusion, and quite hid the view.
Michel Ardan and Maston walked on side by side phasing silently through the tall grass,
making a road for themselves through the vigorous creepers, looking in all the bushes or
branches lost in the sombre shade of the foliage, and expecting to hear a shot at every step.
As to the traces that Barbicane must have left of his passage through the wood, it was
impossible for them to see them, and they marched blindly on in the hardly-formed paths in
which an Indian would have followed his adversary step by step.
After a vain search of about an hour’s length the two companions stopped. Their anxiety was
redoubled.
“It must be all over,” said Maston in despair. “A man like Barbicane would not lay traps or
condescend to any manoeuvre! He is too frank, too courageous. He has gone straight into
danger, and doubtless far enough from the bushman for the wind to carry off the noise of the
shot!”
“But we should have heard it!” answered Michel Ardan.
“But what if we came too late?” exclaimed J.T. Maston in an accent of despair.
Michel Ardan did not find any answer to make. Maston and he resumed their interrupted
walk. From time to time they shouted; they called either Barbicane or Nicholl; but neither of
the two adversaries answered. Joyful flocks of birds, roused by the noise, disappeared
amongst the branches, and some frightened deer fled through the copses.
78
They continued their search another hour. The greater part of the wood had been explored.
Nothing revealed the presence of the combatants. They began to doubt the affirmation of the
bushman, and Ardan was going to renounce the pursuit as useless, when all at once Maston
stopped.
“Hush!” said he. “There is some one yonder!”
“Some one?” answered Michel Ardan.
“Yes! a man! He does not seem to move. His rifle is not in his hand. What can he be doing?”
“But do you recognise him?” asked Michel Ardan.
“Yes, yes! he is turning round,” answered Maston.
“Who is it?”
“Captain Nicholl!”
“Nicholl!” cried Michel Ardan, whose heart almost stopped beating.
“Nicholl disarmed! Then he had nothing more to fear from his adversary?”
“Let us go to him,” said Michel Ardan; “we shall know how it is.”
But his companion and he had not gone fifty steps when they stopped to examine the captain
more attentively. They imagined they should find a bloodthirsty and revengeful man. Upon
seeing him they remained stupefied.
A net with fine meshes was hung between two gigantic tulip-trees, and in it a small bird, with
its wings entangled, was struggling with plaintive cries. The bird-catcher who had hung the
net was not a human being but a venomous spider, peculiar to the country, as large as a
pigeon’s egg, and furnished with enormous legs. The hideous insect, as he was rushing on his
prey, was forced to turn back and take refuge in the high branches of a tulip-tree, for a
formidable enemy threatened him in his turn.
In fact, Captain Nicholl, with his gun on the ground, forgetting the dangers of his situation,
was occupied in delivering as delicately as possible the victim taken in the meshes of the
monstrous spider. When he had finished he let the little bird fly away; it fluttered its wings
joyfully and disappeared.
Nicholl, touched, was watching it fly through the copse when he heard these words uttered in
a voice full of emotion: 
“You are a brave man, you are!”
He turned. Michel Ardan was in front of him, repeating in every tone 
“And a kind one!”
“Michel Ardan!” exclaimed the captain, “what have you come here for, sir?”
“To shake hands with you, Nicholl, and prevent you killing Barbicane or being killed by
him.”
“Barbicane!” cried the captain, “I have been looking for him these two hours without finding
him! Where is he hiding himself?”
“Nicholl!” said Michel Ardan, “this is not polite! You must always respect your adversary;
don’t be uneasy; if Barbicane is alive we shall find him, and so much the more easily that if
he has not amused himself with protecting birds he must be looking for you too. But when
you have found him and Michel Ardan tells you this there will be no duel between you.”
79
“Between President Barbicane and me,” answered Nicholl gravely, “there is such rivalry that
the death of one of us ”
“Come, come!” resumed Michel Ardan, “brave men like you may detest one another, but
they respect one another too. You will not fight.”
“I shall fight, sir.”
“No you won’t.”
“Captain,” then said J.T. Maston heartily, “I am the president’s friend, his alter ego; if you
must absolutely kill some one kill me; that will be exactly the same thing.”
“Sir,” said Nicholl, convulsively seizing his rifle, “this joking ”
“Friend Maston is not joking,” answered Michel Ardan, “and I understand his wanting to be
killed for the man he loves; but neither he nor Barbicane will fall under Captain Nicholl’s
bullets, for I have so tempting a proposition to make to the two rivals that they will hasten to
accept it.”
“But what is it, pray?” asked Nicholl, with visible incredulity.
“Patience,” answered Ardan; “I can only communicate it in Barbicane’s presence.”
“Let us look for him, then,” cried the captain.
The three men immediately set out; the captain, having discharged his rifle, threw it on his
shoulder and walked on in silence.
During another half-hour the search was in vain. Maston was seized with a sinister
presentiment. He observed Captain Nicholl closely, asking himself if, once the captain’s
vengeance satisfied, the unfortunate Barbicane had not been left lying in some bloody thicket.
Michel Ardan seemed to have the same thought, and they were both looking questioningly at
Captain Nicholl when Maston suddenly stopped.
The motionless bust of a man leaning against a gigantic catalpa appeared twenty feet off half
hidden in the grass.
“It is he!” said Maston.
Barbicane did not move. Ardan stared at the captain, but he did not wince. Ardan rushed
forward, crying 
“Barbicane! Barbicane!”
No answer. Ardan was about to seize his arm; he stopped short, uttering a cry of surprise.
Barbicane, with a pencil in his hand, was tracing geometrical figures upon a memorandumbook, whilst his unloaded gun lay on the ground.
Absorbed in his work, the savant, forgetting in his turn his duel and his vengeance, had
neither seen nor heard anything.
But when Michel Ardan placed his hand on that of the president, he got up and looked at him
with astonishment.
“Ah!” cried he at last; “you here! I have found it, my friend, I have found it!”
“What?”
“The way to do it.”
“The way to do what?”
80
“To counteract the effect of the shock at the departure of the projectile.”
“Really?” said Michel, looking at the captain out of the corner of his eye.
“Yes, water! simply water, which will act as a spring. Ah, Maston!” cried Barbicane, “you
too!”
“Himself,” answered Michel Ardan; “and allow me to introduce at the same time the worthy
Captain Nicholl.”
“Nicholl!” cried Barbicane, up in a moment. “Excuse me, captain,” said he; “I had forgotten.
I am ready.”
Michel Ardan interfered before the two enemies had time to recriminate.
“Faith,” said he, “it is fortunate that brave fellows like you did not meet sooner. We should
now have to mourn for one or other of you; but, thanks to God, who has prevented it, there is
nothing more to fear. When one forgets his hatred to plunge into mechanical problems and
the other to play tricks on spiders, their hatred cannot be dangerous to anybody.”
And Michel Ardan related the captain’s story to the president.
“I ask you now,” said he as he concluded, “if two good beings like you were made to break
each other’s heads with gunshots?”
There was in this rather ridiculous situation something so unexpected, that Barbicane and
Nicholl did not know how to look at one another. Michel Ardan felt this, and resolved to try
for a reconciliation.
“My brave friends,” said he, smiling in his most fascinating manner, “it has all been a
mistake between you, nothing more. Well, to prove that all is ended between you, and as you
are men who risk your lives, frankly accept the proposition that I am going to make to you.”
“Speak,” said Nicholl.
“Friend Barbicane believes that his projectile will go straight to the moon.”
“Yes, certainly,” replied the president.
“And friend Nicholl is persuaded that it will fall back on the earth.”
“I am certain of it,” cried the captain.
“Good,” resumed Michel Ardan. “I do not pretend to make you agree; all I say to you is,
‘Come with me, and see if we shall stop on the road.’”
“What?” said J.T. Maston, stupefied.
The two rivals at this sudden proposition had raised their eyes and looked at each other
attentively. Barbicane waited for Captain Nicholl’s answer; Nicholl awaited the president’s
reply.
“Well,” said Michel in his most engaging tone, “as there is now no shock to fear  ”
“Accepted!” cried Barbicane.
But although this word was uttered very quickly, Nicholl had finished it at the same time.
“Hurrah! bravo!” cried Michel Ardan, holding out his hands to the two adversaries. “And
now that the affair is arranged, my friends, allow me to treat you French fashion. Allons
déjeuner.”
81
XXII. The New Citizen Of The United States
That day all America heard about the duel and its singular termination. The part played by the
chivalrous European, his unexpected proposition which solved the difficulty, the
simultaneous acceptation of the two rivals, that conquest of the lunar continent to which
France and the United States were going to march in concert everything tended to increase
Michel Ardan’s popularity. It is well known how enthusiastic the Yankees will get about an
individual. In a country where grave magistrates harness themselves to a dancer’s carriage
and draw it in triumph, it may be judged how the bold Frenchman was treated. If they did not
take out his horses it was probably because he had none, but all other marks of enthusiasm
were showered upon him. There was no citizen who did not join him heart and mind: Ex
pluribus unam, according to the motto of the United States.
From that day Michel Ardan had not a minute’s rest. Deputations from all parts of the Union
worried him incessantly. He was forced to receive them whether he would or no. The hands
he shook could not be counted; he was soon completely worn out, his voice became hoarse in
consequence of his innumerable speeches, and only escaped from his lips in unintelligible
sounds, and he nearly caught a gastro-enterite after the toasts he proposed to the Union. This
success would have intoxicated another man from the first, but he managed to stay in
a spirituelle and charming demi-inebriety.
Amongst the deputations of every sort that assailed him, that of the “Lunatics” did not forget
what they owed to the future conqueror of the moon. One day some of these poor creatures,
numerous enough in America, went to him and asked to return with him to their native
country. Some of them pretended to speak “Selenite,” and wished to teach it to Michel Ardan,
who willingly lent himself to their innocent mania, and promised to take their messages to
their friends in the moon.
“Singular folly!” said he to Barbicane, after having dismissed them; “and a folly that often
takes possession of men of great intelligence. One of our most illustrious savants, Arago, told
me that many very wise and reserved people in their conceptions became much excited and
gave way to incredible singularities every time the moon occupied them. Do you believe in
the influence of the moon upon maladies?”
“Very little,” answered the president of the Gun Club.
“I do not either, and yet history has preserved some facts that, to say the least, are
astonishing. Thus in 1693, during an epidemic, people perished in the greatest numbers on
the 21st of January, during an eclipse. The celebrated Bacon fainted during the moon
eclipses, and only came to himself after its entire emersion. King Charles VI. relapsed six
times into madness during the year 1399, either at the new or full moon. Physicians have
ranked epilepsy amongst the maladies that follow the phases of the moon. Nervous maladies
have often appeared to be influenced by it. Mead speaks of a child who had convulsions
when the moon was in opposition. Gall remarked that insane persons underwent an accession
of their disorder twice in every month, at the epochs of the new and full moon. Lastly, a
thousand observations of this sort made upon malignant fevers and somnambulism tend to
prove that the Queen of Night has a mysterious influence upon terrestrial maladies.”
“But how? why?” asked Barbicane.
“Why?” answered Ardan. “Why, the only thing I can tell you is what Arago repeated
nineteen centuries after Plutarch. Perhaps it is because it is not true.”
82
In the height of his triumph Michel Ardan could not escape any of the annoyances incidental
to a celebrated man. Managers of entertainments wished to exhibit him. Barnum offered him
a million dollars to show him as a curious animal in the different towns of the United States.
Still, though he refused to satisfy public curiosity in that way, his portraits went all over the
world, and occupied the place of honour in albums; proofs were made of all sizes from life
size to medallions. Every one could possess the hero in all positions head, bust, standing,
full-face, profile, three-quarters, back. Fifteen hundred thousand copies were taken, and it
would have been a fine occasion to get money by relics, but he did not profit by it. If he had
sold his hairs for a dollar apiece there would have remained enough to make his fortune!
To tell the truth, this popularity did not displease him. On the contrary, he put himself at the
disposition of the public, and corresponded with the entire universe. They repeated his
witticisms, especially those he did not perpetrate.
Not only had he all the men for him, but the women too. What an infinite number of good
marriages he might have made if he had taken a fancy to “settle!” Old maids especially
dreamt before his portraits day and night.
It is certain that he would have found female companions by hundreds, even if he had
imposed the condition of following him up into the air. Women are intrepid when they are
not afraid of everything. But he had no intention of transplanting a race of Franco-Americans
upon the lunar continent, so he refused.
“I do not mean,” said he, “to play the part of Adam with a daughter of Eve up there. I might
meet with serpents!”
As soon as he could withdraw from the joys of triumph, too often repeated, he went with his
friends to pay a visit to the Columbiad. He owed it that. Besides, he was getting very learned
in ballistics since he had lived with Barbicane, J.T. Maston, and tutti quanti. His greatest
pleasure consisted in repeating to these brave artillerymen that they were only amiable and
learned murderers. He was always joking about it. The day he visited the Columbiad he
greatly admired it, and went down to the bore of the gigantic mortar that was soon to hurl him
towards the Queen of Night.
“At least,” said he, “that cannon will not hurt anybody, which is already very astonishing on
the part of a cannon. But as to your engines that destroy, burn, smash, and kill, don’t talk to
me about them!”
It is necessary to report here a proposition made by J.T. Maston. When the secretary of the
Gun Club heard Barbicane and Nicholl accept Michel Ardan’s proposition he resolved to join
them, and make a party of four. One day he asked to go. Barbicane, grieved at having to
refuse, made him understand that the projectile could not carry so many passengers. J.T.
Maston, in despair, went to Michel Ardan, who advised him to be resigned, adding one or
two arguments ad hominem.
“You see, old fellow,” he said to him, “you must not be offended, but really, between
ourselves, you are too incomplete to present yourself in the moon.”
“Incomplete!” cried the valiant cripple.
“Yes, my brave friend. Suppose we should meet with inhabitants up there. Do you want to
give them a sorry idea of what goes on here, teach them what war is, show them that we
employ the best part of our time in devouring each other and breaking arms and limbs, and
that upon a globe that could feed a hundred thousand millions of inhabitants, and where there
83
are hardly twelve hundred millions? Why, my worthy friend, you would have us shown to the
door!”
“But if you arrive smashed to pieces,” replied J.T. Maston, “you will be as incomplete as I.”
“Certainly,” answered Michel Ardan, “but we shall not arrive in pieces.”
In fact, a preparatory experiment, tried on the 18th of October, had been attended with the
best results, and given rise to the most legitimate hopes. Barbicane, wishing to know the
effect of the shock at the moment of the projectile’s departure, sent for a 32-inch mortar from
Pensacola Arsenal. It was installed upon the quay of Hillisboro Harbour, in order that the
bomb might fall into the sea, and the shock of its fall be deadened. He only wished to
experiment upon the shock of its departure, not that of its arrival.
A hollow projectile was prepared with the greatest care for this curious experiment. A thick
wadding put upon a network of springs made of the best steel lined it inside. It was quite a
wadded nest.
“What a pity one can’t go in it!” said J.T. Maston, regretting that his size did not allow him to
make the venture.
Into this charming bomb, which was closed by means of a lid, screwed down, they put first a
large cat, then a squirrel belonging to the perpetual secretary of the Gun Club, which J.T.
Maston was very fond of. But they wished to know how this little animal, not likely to be
giddy, would support this experimental journey.
The mortar was loaded with 160 lbs. of powder and the bomb. It was then fired.
The projectile immediately rose with rapidity, described a majestic parabola, attained a height
of about a thousand feet, and then with a graceful curve fell into the waves.
Without losing an instant, a vessel was sent to the spot where it fell; skilful divers sank under
water and fastened cable-chains to the handles of the bomb, which was rapidly hoisted on
board. Five minutes had not elapsed between the time the animals were shut up and the
unscrewing of their prison lid.
Ardan, Barbicane, Maston, and Nicholl were upon the vessel, and they assisted at the
operation with a sentiment of interest easy to understand. The bomb was hardly opened
before the cat sprang out, rather bruised but quite lively, and not looking as if it had just
returned from an aërial expedition. But nothing, was seen of the squirrel. The truth was then
discovered. The cat had eaten its travelling companion.
J.T. Maston was very grieved at the loss of his poor squirrel, and proposed to inscribe it in the
martyrology of science.
However that may be, after this experiment all hesitation and fear were at an end; besides,
Barbicane’s plans were destined further to perfect the projectile, and destroy almost entirely
the effect of the shock. There was nothing more to do but to start.
Two days later Michel Ardan received a message from the President of the Union, an honour
which he much appreciated.
After the example of his chivalrous countryman, La Fayette, the government had bestowed
upon him the title of “Citizen of the United States of America.”
84
XXIII. The Projectile Compartment
After the celebrated Columbiad was completed public interest immediately centred upon the
projectile, the new vehicle destined to transport the three bold adventurers across space. No
one had forgotten that in his despatch of September 30th Michel Ardan asked for a
modification of the plans laid out by the members of the committee.
President Barbicane then thought with reason that the form of the projectile was of slight
importance, for, after crossing the atmosphere in a few seconds, it would meet with vacuum.
The committee had therefore chosen the round form, so that the ball might turn over and over
and do as it liked. But as soon as it had to be made into a vehicle, that was another thing.
Michel Ardan did not want to travel squirrel-fashion; he wished to go up head up and feet
down with as much dignity as in the car of a balloon, quicker of course, but without unseemly
gambols.
New plans were, therefore, sent to the firm of Breadwill and Co., of Albany, with the
recommendation to execute them without delay. The projectile, thus modified, was cast on
the 2nd of November, and sent immediately to Stony Hill by the Eastern Railway.
On the 10th it arrived without accident at its place of destination. Michel Ardan, Barbicane,
and Nicholl awaited with the most lively impatience this “projectile compartment” in which
they were to take their passage for the discovery of a new world.
It must be acknowledged that it was a magnificent piece of metal, a metallurgic production
that did the greatest honour to the industrial genius of the Americans. It was the first time that
aluminium had been obtained in so large a mass, which result might be justly regarded as
prodigious. This precious projectile sparkled in the rays of the sun. Seeing it in its imposing
shape with its conical top, it might easily have been taken for one of those extinguishershaped towers that architects of the Middle Ages put at the angles of their castles. It only
wanted loopholes and a weathercock.
“I expect,” exclaimed Michel Ardan, “to see a man armed cap-à-pie come out of it. We shall
be like feudal lords in there; with a little artillery we could hold our own against a whole
army of Selenites that is, if there are any in the moon!”
“Then the vehicle pleases you?” asked Barbicane.
“Yes, yes! certainly,” answered Michel Ardan, who was examining it as an artist. “I only
regret that its form is not a little more slender, its cone more graceful; it ought to be
terminated by a metal group, some Gothic ornament, a salamander escaping from it with
outspread wings and open beak.”
“What would be the use?” said Barbicane, whose positive mind was little sensitive to the
beauties of art.
“Ah, friend Barbicane, I am afraid you will never understand the use, or you would not ask!”
“Well, tell me, at all events, my brave companion.”
“Well, my friend, I think we ought always to put a little art in all we do. Do you know an
Indian play called The Child’s Chariot?”
“Not even by name,” answered Barbicane.
85
“I am not surprised at that,” continued Michel Ardan. “Learn, then, that in that play there is a
robber who, when in the act of piercing the wall of a house, stops to consider whether he shall
make his hole in the shape of a lyre, a flower, or a bird. Well, tell me, friend Barbicane, if at
that epoch you had been his judge would you have condemned that robber?”
“Without hesitation,” answered the president of the Gun Club, “and as a burglar too.”
“Well, I should have acquitted him, friend Barbicane. That is why you could never
understand me.”
“I will not even try, my valiant artist.”
“But, at least,” continued Michel Ardan, “as the exterior of our projectile compartment leaves
much to be desired, I shall be allowed to furnish the inside as I choose, and with all luxury
suitable to ambassadors from the earth.”
“About that, my brave Michel,” answered Barbicane, “you can do entirely as you please.”
But before passing to the agreeable the president of the Gun Club had thought of the useful,
and the means he had invented for lessening the effects of the shock were applied with
perfect intelligence.
Barbicane had said to himself, not unreasonably, that no spring would be sufficiently
powerful to deaden the shock, and during his famous promenade in Skersnaw Wood he had
ended by solving this great difficulty in an ingenious fashion. He depended upon water to
render him this signal service. This is how: 
The projectile was to be filled to the depth of three feet with water destined to support a
water-tight wooden disc, which easily worked within the walls of the projectile. It was upon
this raft that the travellers were to take their place. As to the liquid mass, it was divided by
horizontal partitions which the departing shock would successively break; then each sheet of
water, from the lowest to the highest, escaping by valves in the upper part of the projectile,
thus making a spring, and the disc, itself furnished with extremely powerful buffers, could
not strike the bottom until it had successively broken the different partitions. The travellers
would doubtless feel a violent recoil after the complete escape of the liquid mass, but the first
shock would be almost entirely deadened by so powerful a spring.
It is true that three feet on a surface of 541 square feet would weigh nearly 11,500 lbs; but the
escape of gas accumulated in the Columbiad would suffice, Barbicane thought to conquer
that increase of weight; besides, the shock would send out all that water in less than a second,
and the projectile would soon regain its normal weight.
This is what the president of the Gun Club had imagined, and how he thought he had solved
the great question of the recoil. This work, intelligently comprehended by the engineers of the
Breadwill firm, was marvellously executed; the effect once produced and the water gone, the
travellers could easily get rid of the broken partitions and take away the mobile disc that bore
them at the moment of departure.
As to the upper sides of the projectile, they were lined with a thick wadding of leather, put
upon the best steel springs as supple as watch-springs. The escape-pipes hidden under this
wadding were not even seen.
All imaginable precautions for deadening the first shock having been taken, Michel Ardan
said they must be made of “very bad stuff” to be crushed.
The projectile outside was nine feet wide and twelve feet high. In order not to pass the weight
assigned the sides had been made a little less thick and the bottom thicker, as it would have to
86
support all the violence of the gases developed by the deflagration of the pyroxyle. Bombs
and cylindro-conical howitzers are always made with thicker bottoms.
The entrance to this tower of metal was a narrow opening in the wall of the cone, like the
“man-hole” of steam boilers. It closed hermetically by means of an aluminium plate fastened
inside by powerful screw pressure. The travellers could therefore leave their mobile prison at
will as soon as they had reached the Queen of Night.
But going was not everything; it was necessary to see on the road. Nothing was easier. In
fact, under the wadding were four thick lenticular footlights, two let into the circular wall of
the projectile, the third in its lower part, and the fourth in its cone. The travellers could,
therefore, observe during their journey the earth they were leaving, the moon they were
approaching, and the constellated spaces of the sky. These skylights were protected against
the shocks of departure by plates let into solid grooves, which it was easy to move by
unscrewing them. By that means the air contained in the projectile could not escape, and it
was possible to make observations.
All these mechanical appliances, admirably set, worked with the greatest ease, and the
engineers had not shown themselves less intelligent in the arrangement of the projectile
compartment.
Lockers solidly fastened were destined to contain the water and provisions necessary for the
three travellers; they could even procure themselves fire and light by means of gas stored up
in a special case under a pressure of several atmospheres. All they had to do was to turn a tap,
and the gas would light and warm this comfortable vehicle for six days. It will be seen that
none of the things essential to life, or even to comfort, were wanting. More, thanks to the
instincts of Michel Ardan, the agreeable was joined to the useful under the form of objects of
art; he would have made a veritable artist’s studio of his projectile if room had not been
wanting. It would be mistaken to suppose that three persons would be restricted for space in
that metal tower. It had a surface of 54 square feet, and was nearly 10 feet high, and allowed
its occupiers a certain liberty of movement. They would not have been so much at their ease
in the most comfortable railway compartment of the United States.
The question of provisions and lighting having been solved, there remained the question of
air. It was evident that the air confined in the projectile would not be sufficient for the
travellers’ respiration for four days; each man, in fact, consumes in one hour all the oxygen
contained in 100 litres of air. Barbicane, his two companions, and two dogs that he meant to
take, would consume every twenty-four hours 2,400 litres of oxygen, or a weight equal to 7
lbs. The air in the projectile must, therefore, be renewed. How? By a very simple method,
that of Messrs. Reiset and Regnault, indicated by Michel Ardan during the discussion of the
meeting.
It is known that the air is composed principally of twenty-one parts of oxygen and seventynine parts of azote. Now what happens in the act of respiration? A very simple phenomenon,
Man absorbs the oxygen of the air, eminently adapted for sustaining life, and throws out the
azote intact. The air breathed out has lost nearly five per cent, of its oxygen, and then
contains a nearly equal volume of carbonic acid, the definitive product of the combustion of
the elements of the blood by the oxygen breathed in it. It happens, therefore, that in a
confined space and after a certain time all the oxygen of the air is replaced by carbonic acid,
an essentially deleterious gas.
The question was then reduced to this, the azote being conserved intact 1. To remake the
oxygen absorbed; 2. To destroy the carbonic acid breathed out. Nothing easier to do by
means of chlorate of potash and caustic potash. The former is a salt which appears under the
87
form of white crystals; when heated to a temperature of 400° it is transformed into chlorine of
potassium, and the oxygen which it contains is given off freely. Now 18 lbs. of chlorate of
potash give 7 lbs of oxygen that is to say, the quantity necessary to the travellers for
twenty-four hours.
As to caustic potash, it has a great affinity for carbonic acid mixed in air, and it is sufficient
to shake it in order for it to seize upon the acid and form bicarbonate of potash. So much for
the absorption of carbonic acid.
By combining these two methods they were certain of giving back to vitiated air all its lifegiving qualities. The two chemists, Messrs. Reiset and Regnault, had made the experiment
with success.
But it must be said the experiment had only been made in anima vili. Whatever its scientific
accuracy might be, no one knew how man could bear it.
Such was the observation made at the meeting where this grave question was discussed.
Michel Ardan meant to leave no doubt about the possibility of living by means of this
artificial air, and he offered to make the trial before the departure.
But the honour of putting it to the proof was energetically claimed by J.T. Maston.
“As I am not going with you,” said the brave artilleryman, “the least I can do will be to live in
the projectile for a week.”
It would have been ungracious to refuse him. His wish was complied with. A sufficient
quantity of chlorate of potash and caustic potash was placed at his disposition, with
provisions for a week; then having shaken hands with his friends, on the 12th of November at
6 a.m., after having expressly recommended them not to open his prison before the 20th at 6
p.m., he crept into the projectile, the iron plate of which was hermetically shut.
What happened during that week? It was impossible to ascertain. The thickness of the
projectile’s walls prevented any interior noise from reaching the outside.
On the 20th of November, at six o’clock precisely, the plate was removed; the friends of J.T.
Maston were rather uneasy. But they were promptly reassured by hearing a joyful voice
shouting a formidable hurrah!
The secretary of the Gun Club appeared on the summit of the cone in a triumphant attitude.
He had grown fat!
88
XXIV. The Telescope Of The Rocky Mountains
On the 20th of October of the preceding year, after the subscription list was closed, the
president of the Gun Club had credited the Cambridge Observatory with the sums necessary
for the construction of a vast optical instrument. This telescope was to be powerful enough to
render visible on the surface of the moon an object being at least nine feet wide.
There is an important difference between a field-glass and a telescope, which it is well to
recall here. A field-glass is composed of a tube which carries at its upper extremity a convex
glass called an object-glass, and at its lower extremity a second glass called ocular, to which
the eye of the observer is applied. The rays from the luminous object traverse the first glass,
and by refraction form an image upside down at its focus. This image is looked at with the
ocular, which magnifies it. The tube of the field-glass is, therefore, closed at each extremity
by the object and the ocular glasses.
The telescope, on the contrary, is open at its upper extremity. The rays from the object
observed penetrate freely into it, and strike a concave metallic mirror that is to say, they are
focussed. From thence their reflected rays meet with a little mirror, which sends them back to
the ocular in such a way as to magnify the image produced.
Thus in field-glasses refraction plays the principal part, and reflection does in the telescope.
Hence the name of refractors given to the former, and reflectors given to the latter. All the
difficulty in the execution of these optical instruments lies in the making of the object-glass,
whether they be made of glass or metallic mirrors.
Still at the epoch when the Gun Club made its great experiment these instruments were
singularly perfected and gave magnificent results. The time was far distant when Galileo
observed the stars with his poor glass, which magnified seven times at the most. Since the
16th century optical instruments had widened and lengthened in considerable proportions,
and they allowed the stellar spaces to be gauged to a depth unknown before. Amongst the
refracting instruments at work at that period were the glass of the Poulkowa Observatory in
Russia, the object-glass of which measured 15 inches in width, that of the French optician
Lerebours, furnished with an object-glass equally large, and lastly that of the Cambridge
Observatory, furnished with an object-glass 19 inches in diameter.
Amongst telescopes, two were known of remarkable power and gigantic dimensions. The
first, constructed by Herschel, was 36 feet in length, and had an object-glass of 4 feet 6
inches; it magnified 6,000 times; the second, raised in Ireland, at Birrcastle, in Parsonstown
Park, belonged to Lord Rosse; the length of its tube was 48 feet and the width of its mirror 6
feet; it magnified 6,400 times, and it had required an immense erection of masonry on which
to place the apparatus necessary for working the instrument, which weighed 12-1/2 tons.
But it will be seen that notwithstanding these colossal dimensions the magnifying power
obtained did not exceed 6,000 times in round numbers; now that power would only bring the
moon within 39 miles, and would only allow objects 60 feet in diameter to be perceived
unless these objects were very elongated.
Now in space they had to deal with a projectile 9 feet wide and 15 long, so the moon had to
be brought within five miles at least, and for that a magnifying power of 48,000 times was
necessary.
89
Such was the problem propounded to the Cambridge Observatory. They were not to be
stopped by financial difficulties, so there only remained material difficulties.
First of all they had to choose between telescopes and field-glasses. The latter had some
advantages. With equal object-glasses they have a greater magnifying power, because the
luminous rays that traverse the glasses lose less by absorption than the reflection on the
metallic mirror of telescopes; but the thickness that can be given to glass is limited, for too
thick it does not allow the luminous rays to pass. Besides, the construction of these vast
glasses is excessively difficult, and demands a considerable time, measured by years.
Therefore, although images are better given by glasses, an inappreciable advantage when the
question is to observe the moon, the light of which is simply reflected they decided to employ
the telescope, which is prompter in execution and is capable of a greater magnifying power;
only as the luminous rays lose much of their intensity by traversing the atmosphere, the Gun
Club resolved to set up the instrument on one of the highest mountains of the Union, which
would diminish the depth of the aërial strata.
In telescopes it has been seen that the glass placed at the observer’s eye produces the
magnifying power, and the object-glass which bears this power the best is the one that has the
largest diameter and the greatest focal distance. In order to magnify 48,000 times it must be
much larger than those of Herschel and Lord Rosse. There lay the difficulty, for the casting of
these mirrors is a very delicate operation.
Happily, some years before a savant of the Institut de France, Léon Foucault, had just
invented means by which the polishing of object-glasses became very prompt and easy by
replacing the metallic mirror by taking a piece of glass the size required and plating it.
It was to be fixed according to the method invented by Herschel for telescopes. In the great
instrument of the astronomer at Slough, the image of objects reflected by the mirror inclined
at the bottom of the tube was formed at the other extremity where the eyeglass was placed.
Thus the observer, instead of being placed at the lower end of the tube, was hoisted to the
upper end, and there with his eyeglass he looked down into the enormous cylinder. This
combination had the advantage of doing away with the little mirror destined to send back the
image to the ocular glass, which thus only reflected once instead of twice; therefore there
were fewer luminous rays extinguished, the image was less feeble, and more light was
obtained, a precious advantage in the observation that was to be made.
This being resolved upon, the work was begun. According to the calculations of the
Cambridge Observatory staff, the tube of the new reflector was to be 280 feet long and its
mirror 16 feet in diameter. Although it was so colossal it was not comparable to the telescope
10,000 feet long which the astronomer Hooke proposed to construct some years ago.
Nevertheless the setting up of such an apparatus presented great difficulties.
The question of its site was promptly settled. It must be upon a high mountain, and high
mountains are not numerous in the States.
In fact, the orographical system of this great country only contains two chains of average
height, amongst which flows the magnificent Mississippi, which the Americans would call
the “king of rivers” if they admitted any royalty whatever.
On the east rise the Apalachians, the very highest point of which, in New Hampshire, does
not exceed the very moderate altitude of 5,600 feet.
On the west are, however, the Rocky Mountains, that immense chain which begins at the
Straits of Magellan, follows the west coast of South America under the name of the Andes or
90
Cordilleras, crosses the Isthmus of Panama, and runs up the whole of North America to the
very shores of the Polar Sea.
These mountains are not very high, and the Alps or Himalayas would look down upon them
with disdain. In fact, their highest summit is only 10,701 feet high, whilst Mont Blanc is
14,439, and the highest summit of the Himalayas is 26,776 feet above the level of the sea.
But as the Gun Club wished that its telescope, as well as the Columbiad, should be set up in
the States of the Union, they were obliged to be content with the Rocky Mountains, and all
the necessary material was sent to the summit of Long’s Peak in the territory of Missouri.
Neither pen nor language could relate the difficulties of every kind that the American
engineers had to overcome, and the prodigies of audacity and skill that they accomplished.
Enormous stones, massive pieces of wrought-iron, heavy corner-clamps, and huge portions of
cylinder had to be raised with an object-glass, weighing nearly 30,000 lbs., above the line of
perpetual snow for more than 10,000 feet in height, after crossing desert prairies,
impenetrable forests, fearful rapids far from all centres of population, and in the midst of
savage regions in which every detail of life becomes an insoluble problem, and, nevertheless,
American genius triumphed over all these obstacles. Less than a year after beginning the
works in the last days of the month of September, the gigantic reflector rose in the air to a
height of 280 feet. It was hung from an enormous iron scaffolding; an ingenious arrangement
allowed it to be easily moved towards every point of the sky, and to follow the stars from one
horizon to the other during their journey across space.
It had cost more than 400,000 dollars. The first time it was pointed at the moon the observers
felt both curious and uneasy. What would they discover in the field of this telescope which
magnified objects 48,000 times? Populations, flocks of lunar animals, towns, lakes, and
oceans? No, nothing that science was not already acquainted with, and upon all points of her
disc the volcanic nature of the moon could be determined with absolute precision.
But the telescope of the Rocky Mountains, before being used by the Gun Club, rendered
immense services to astronomy. Thanks to its power of penetration, the depths of the sky
were explored to their utmost limits, the apparent diameter of a great number of stars could
be rigorously measured, and Mr. Clarke, of the Cambridge staff, resolved the Crab nebula in
Taurus, which Lord Rosse’s reflector had never been able to do.
91
XXV. Final Details
It was the 22nd of November. The supreme departure was to take place ten days later. One
operation still remained to bring it to a happy termination, a delicate and perilous operation
exacting infinite precautions, and against the success of which Captain Nicholl had laid his
third bet. It was, in fact, nothing less than the loading of the gun and the introduction into it of
400,000 lbs. of gun-cotton. Nicholl had thought, not without reason, perhaps, that the
handling of so large a quantity of pyroxyle would cause grave catastrophes, and that in any
case this eminently explosive mass would ignite of itself under the pressure of the projectile.
There were also grave dangers increased by the carelessness of the Americans, who, during
the Federal war, used to load their cannon cigar in mouth. But Barbicane had set his heart on
succeeding, and did not mean to founder in port; he therefore chose his best workmen, made
them work under his superintendence, and by dint of prudence and precautions he managed
to put all the chances of success on his side.
First he took care not to bring all his charge at once to the inclosure of Stony Hill. He had it
brought little by little carefully packed in sealed cases. The 400,000 lbs. of pyroxyle had been
divided into packets of 500 lbs., which made 800 large cartridges made carefully by the
cleverest artisans of Pensacola. Each case contained ten, and they arrived one after the other
by the railroad of Tampa Town; by that means there were never more than 500 lbs. of
pyroxyle at once in the inclosure. As soon as it arrived each case was unloaded by workmen
walking barefoot, and each cartridge transported to the orifice of the Columbiad, into which
they lowered them by means of cranes worked by the men. Every steam-engine had been
excluded, and the least fires extinguished for two miles round. Even in November it was
necessary to preserve this gun-cotton from the ardour of the sun. So they worked at night by
light produced in a vacuum by means of Rühmkorff’s apparatus, which threw an artificial
brightness into the depths of the Columbiad. There the cartridges were arranged with the
utmost regularity, fastened together by a wire destined to communicate the electric spark to
them all simultaneously.
In fact, it was by means of electricity that fire was to be set to this mass of gun-cotton. All
these single wires, surrounded by isolating material, were rolled into a single one at a narrow
hole pierced at the height the projectile was to be placed; there they crossed the thick metal
wall and came up to the surface by one of the vent-holes in the masonry made on purpose.
Once arrived at the summit of Stony Hill, the wire supported on poles for a distance of two
miles met a powerful pile of Bunsen passing through a non-conducting apparatus. It would,
therefore, be enough to press with the finger the knob of the apparatus for the electric current
to be at once established, and to set fire to the 400,000 lbs. of gun-cotton. It is hardly
necessary to say that this was only to be done at the last moment.
On the 28th of November the 800 cartridges were placed at the bottom of the Columbiad.
That part of the operation had succeeded. But what worry, anxiety, and struggles President
Barbicane had to undergo! In vain had he forbidden entrance to Stony Hill; every day curious
sightseers climbed over the palisading, and some, pushing imprudence to folly, came and
smoked amongst the bales of gun-cotton. Barbicane put himself into daily rages. J.T. Maston
seconded him to the best of his ability, chasing the intruders away and picking up the stilllighted cigar-ends which the Yankees threw about a rude task, for more than 300,000
people pressed round the palisades. Michel Ardan had offered himself to escort the cases to
the mouth of the gun, but having caught him with a cigar in his mouth whilst he drove out the
92
intruders to whom he was giving this unfortunate example, the president of the Gun Club saw
that he could not depend upon this intrepid smoker, and was obliged to have him specially
watched.
At last, there being a Providence even for artillerymen, nothing blew up, and the loading was
happily terminated. The third bet of Captain Nicholl was therefore much imperilled. There
still remained the work of introducing the projectile into the Columbiad and placing it on the
thick bed of gun-cotton.
But before beginning this operation the objects necessary for the journey were placed with
order in the waggon-compartment. There were a good many of them, and if they had allowed
Michel Ardan to do as he pleased he would soon have filled up all the space reserved for the
travellers. No one can imagine all that the amiable Frenchman wished to carry to the moon 
a heap of useless trifles. But Barbicane interfered, and refused all but the strictly necessary.
Several thermometers, barometers, and telescopes were placed in the instrument-case.
The travellers were desirous of examining the moon during their transit, and in order to
facilitate the survey of this new world they took an excellent map by Boeer and Moedler,
the Mappa Selenographica, published in four plates, which is justly looked upon as a
masterpiece of patience and observation. It represented with scrupulous exactitude the
slightest details of that portion of the moon turned towards the earth. Mountains, valleys,
craters, peaks, watersheds, were depicted on it in their exact dimensions, faithful positions,
and names, from Mounts Doerfel and Leibnitz, whose highest summits rise on the eastern
side of the disc, to the Mare Frigoris, which extends into the North Polar regions.
It was, therefore, a precious document for the travellers, for they could study the country
before setting foot upon it.
They took also three rifles and three fowling-pieces with powder and shot in great quantity.
“We do not know with whom we may have to deal,” said Michel Ardan. “Both men and
beasts may be displeased at our visit; we must, therefore, take our precautions.”
The instruments of personal defence were accompanied by pickaxes, spades, saws, and other
indispensable tools, without mentioning garments suitable to every temperature, from the
cold of the polar regions to the heat of the torrid zone.
Michel Ardan would have liked to take a certain number of animals of different sorts, not
male and female of every species, as he did not see the necessity of acclimatising serpents,
tigers, alligators, or any other noxious beasts in the moon.
“No,” said he to Barbicane, “but some useful animals, ox or cow, ass or horse, would look
well in the landscape and be of great use.”
“I agree with you, my dear Ardan,” answered the president of the Gun Club; “but our
projectile is not Noah’s Ark. It differs both in dimensions and object, so let us remain in the
bounds of possibility.”
At last after long discussions it was agreed that the travellers should be content to take with
them an excellent sporting dog belonging to Nicholl and a vigorous Newfoundland of
prodigious strength. Several cases of the most useful seeds were included amongst the
indispensable objects. If they had allowed him, Michel Ardan would have taken several sacks
of earth to sow them in. Any way he took a dozen little trees, which were carefully enveloped
in straw and placed in a corner of the projectile.
93
Then remained the important question of provisions, for they were obliged to provide against
finding the moon absolutely barren. Barbicane managed so well that he took enough for a
year. But it must be added, to prevent astonishment, that these provisions consisted of meat
and vegetable compressed to their smallest volume by hydraulic pressure, and included a
great quantity of nutritive elements; there was not much variety, but it would not do to be too
particular in such an expedition. There was also about fifty gallons of brandy and water for
two months only, for, according to the latest observations of astronomers, no one doubted the
presence of a large quantity of water in the moon. As to provisions, it would have been insane
to believe that the inhabitants of the earth would not find food up there. Michel Ardan had no
doubt about it. If he had he would not have gone.
“Besides,” said he one day to his friends, “we shall not be completely abandoned by our
friends on earth, and they will take care not to forget us.”
“No, certainly,” answered J.T. Maston.
“What do you mean?” asked Nicholl.
“Nothing more simple,” answered Ardan. “Will not our Columbiad be still there? Well, then,
every time that the moon is in favourable conditions of zenith, if not of perigee that is to
say, about once a year could they not send us a projectile loaded with provisions which we
should expect by a fixed date?”
“Hurrah!” cried J.T. Maston. “That is not at all a bad idea. Certainly we will not forget you.”
“I depend upon you. Thus you see we shall have news regularly from the globe, and for our
part we shall be very awkward if we do not find means to communicate with our good friends
on earth.”
These words inspired such confidence that Michel Ardan with his superb assurance would
have carried the whole Gun Club with him. What he said seemed simple, elementary, and
sure of success, and it would have been sordid attachment to this earth to hesitate to follow
the three travellers upon their lunar expedition.
When the different objects were placed in the projectile the water was introduced between the
partitions and the gas for lighting purposes laid in. Barbicane took enough chlorate of potash
and caustic potash for two months, as he feared unforeseen delay. An extremely ingenious
machine working automatically put the elements for good air in motion. The projectile,
therefore, was ready, and the only thing left to do was to lower it into the gun, an operation
full of perils and difficulty.
The enormous projectile was taken to the summit of Stony Hill. There enormous cranes
seized it and held it suspended over the metal well.
This was an anxious moment. If the chains were to break under the enormous weight the fall
of such a mass would inevitably ignite the gun-cotton.
Happily nothing of the sort happened, and a few hours afterwards the projectile-compartment
rested on its pyroxyle bed, a veritable fulminating pillow. The only effect of its pressure was
to ram the charge of the gun more strongly.
“I have lost,” said the captain, handing the sum of 3,000 dollars to President Barbicane.
Barbicane did not wish to receive this money from his travelling companion, but he was
obliged to give way to Nicholl, who wished to fulfil all his engagements before leaving the
earth.
“Then,” said Michel Ardan, “there is but one thing I wish for you now, captain.”
94
“What is that?” asked Nicholl.
“It is that you may lose your other two wagers. By that means we shall be sure not to be
stopped on the road.”
95
XXVI. Fire!
The 1st of December came, the fatal day, for if the projectile did not start that very evening at
10h. 46m. and 40s. p.m., more than eighteen years would elapse before the moon would
present the same simultaneous conditions of zenith and perigee.
The weather was magnificent; notwithstanding the approach of winter the sun shone brightly
and bathed in its radiance that earth which three of its inhabitants were about to leave for a
new world.
How many people slept badly during the night that preceded the ardently-longed-for day!
How many breasts were oppressed with the heavy burden of waiting! All hearts beat with
anxiety except only the heart of Michel Ardan. This impassible person went and came in his
usual business-like way, but nothing in him denoted any unusual preoccupation. His sleep
had been peaceful it was the sleep of Turenne upon a gun-carriage the night before the
battle.
From early dawn an innumerable crowd covered the prairie, which extended as far as the eye
could reach round Stony Hill. Every quarter of an hour the railroad of Tampa brought fresh
sightseers. According to the Tampa Town Observer, five millions of spectators were that day
upon Floridian soil.
The greater part of this crowd had been living in tents round the inclosure, and laid the
foundations of a town which has since been called “Ardan’s Town.” The ground bristled with
huts, cabins, and tents, and these ephemeral habitations sheltered a population numerous
enough to rival the largest cities of Europe.
Every nation upon earth was represented; every language was spoken at the same time. It was
like the confusion of tongues at the Tower of Babel. There the different classes of American
society mixed in absolute equality. Bankers, cultivators, sailors, agents, merchants, cottonplanters, and magistrates elbowed each other with primitive ease. The creoles of Louisiana
fraternised with the farmers of Indiana; the gentlemen of Kentucky and Tennessee, the
elegant and haughty Virginians, joked with the half-savage trappers of the Lakes and the
butchers of Cincinnati. They appeared in broad-brimmed white beavers and Panamas, blue
cotton trousers, from the Opelousa manufactories, draped in elegant blouses of écru cloth, in
boots of brilliant colours, and extravagant shirt-frills; upon shirt-fronts, cuffs, cravats, on their
ten fingers, even in their ears, an assortment of rings, pins, diamonds, chains, buckles, and
trinkets, the cost of which equalled the bad taste. Wife, children, servants, in no less rich
dress, accompanied, followed, preceded, and surrounded their husbands, fathers, and masters,
who resembled the patriarchs amidst their innumerable families.
At meal-times it was a sight to see all these people devour the dishes peculiar to the Southern
States, and eat, with an appetite menacing to the provisioning of Florida, the food that would
be repugnant to a European stomach, such as fricasseed frogs, monkey-flesh, fish-chowder,
underdone opossum, and raccoon steaks.
The liquors that accompanied this indigestible food were numerous. Shouts and vociferations
to buy resounded through the bar-rooms or taverns, decorated with glasses, tankards,
decanters, and bottles of marvellous shapes, mortars for pounding sugar, and bundles of
straws.
“Mint-julep!” roars out one of the salesmen.
96
“Claret sangaree!” shouts another through his nose.
“Gin-sling!” shouts one.
“Cocktail! Brandy-smash!” cries another.
“Who’ll buy real mint-julep in the latest style?” shouted these skilful salesmen, rapidly
passing from one glass to another the sugar, lemon, green mint, crushed ice, water, cognac,
and fresh pine-apple which compose this refreshing drink.
Generally these sounds, addressed to throats made thirsty by the spices they consumed,
mingled into one deafening roar. But on this 1st of December these cries were rare. No one
thought of eating and drinking, and at 4 p.m. there were many spectators in the crowd who
had not taken their customary lunch! A much more significant fact, even the national passion
for gaming was allayed by the general emotion. Thimbles, skittles, and cards were left in their
wrappings, and testified that the great event of the day absorbed all attention.
Until nightfall a dull, noiseless agitation like that which precedes great catastrophes ran
through the anxious crowd. An indescribable uneasiness oppressed all minds, and stopped the
beating of all hearts. Every one wished it over.
However, about seven o’clock this heavy silence was suddenly broken. The moon rose above
the horizon. Several millions of hurrahs saluted her apparition. She was punctual to the
appointment. Shouts of welcome broke from all parts, whilst the blonde Phoebe shone
peacefully in a clear sky, and caressed the enraptured crowd with her most affectionate rays.
At that moment the three intrepid travellers appeared. When they appeared the cries
redoubled in intensity. Unanimously, instantaneously, the national song of the United States
escaped from all the spectators, and “Yankee Doodle,” sung by 5,000,000 of hearty throats,
rose like a roaring tempest to the farthest limits of the atmosphere.
Then, after this irresistible outburst, the hymn was ended, the last harmonies died away by
degrees, and a silent murmur floated over the profoundly-excited crowd.
In the meantime the Frenchman and the two Americans had stepped into the inclosure round
which the crowd was pressing. They were accompanied by the members of the Gun Club,
and deputations sent by the European observatories. Barbicane was coolly and calmly giving
his last orders. Nicholl, with compressed lips and hands crossed behind his back, walked with
a firm and measured step. Michel Ardan, always at his ease, clothed in a perfect travelling
suit, with leather gaiters on his legs, pouch at his side, in vast garment of maroon velvet, a
cigar in his mouth, distributed shakes of the hand with princely prodigality. He was full of
inexhaustible gaiety, laughing, joking, playing pranks upon the worthy J.T. Maston, and was,
in a word, “French,” and, what is worse, “Parisian,” till the last second.
Ten o’clock struck. The moment had come to take their places in the projectile; the necessary
mechanism for the descent the door-plate to screw down, the removal of the cranes and
scaffolding hung over the mouth of the Columbiad, took some time.
Barbicane had set his chronometer to the tenth of a second by that of the engineer Murchison,
who was entrusted with setting fire to the powder by means of the electric spark; the
travellers shut up in the projectile could thus watch the impassive needle which was going to
mark the precise instant of their departure.
The moment for saying farewell had come. The scene was touching; in spite of his gaiety
Michel Ardan felt touched. J.T. Maston had found under his dry eyelids an ancient tear that
he had, doubtless, kept for the occasion. He shed it upon the forehead of his dear president.
97
“Suppose I go too?” said he. “There is still time!”
“Impossible, old fellow,” answered Barbicane.
A few moments later the three travelling companions were installed in the projectile, and had
screwed down the door-plate, and the mouth of the Columbiad, entirely liberated, rose freely
towards the sky.
Nicholl, Barbicane, and Michel Ardan were definitively walled up in their metal vehicle.
Who could predict the universal emotion then at its paroxysm?
The moon was rising in a firmament of limpid purity, outshining on her passage the twinkling
fire of the stars; she passed over the constellation of the Twins, and was now nearly halfway
between the horizon and the zenith.
A frightful silence hung over all that scene. There was not a breath of wind on the earth! Not
a sound of breathing from the crowd! Hearts dared not beat. Every eye was fixed on the
gaping mouth of the Columbiad.
Murchison watched the needle of his chronometer. Hardly forty seconds had to elapse before
the moment of departure struck, and each one lasted a century!
At the twentieth there was a universal shudder, and the thought occurred to all the crowd that
the audacious travellers shut up in the vehicle were likewise counting these terrible seconds!
Some isolated cries were heard.
“Thirty-five! thirty-six! thirty-seven! thirty eight! thirty-nine!  forty! Fire!!!”
Murchison immediately pressed his finger upon the electric knob and hurled the electric
spark into the depths of the Columbiad.
A fearful, unheard-of, superhuman report, of which nothing could give an idea, not even
thunder or the eruption of volcanoes, was immediately produced. An immense spout of fire
sprang up from the bowels of the earth as if from a crater. The soil heaved and very few
persons caught a glimpse of the projectile victoriously cleaving the air amidst the flaming
smoke.
98
XXVII. Cloudy Weather
At the moment when the pyramid of flame rose to a prodigious height in the air it lighted up
the whole of Florida, and for an incalculable moment day was substituted for night over a
considerable extent of country. This immense column of fire was perceived for a hundred
miles out at sea, from the Gulf and from the Atlantic, and more than one ship’s captain noted
the apparition of this gigantic meteor in his log-book.
The discharge of the Columbiad was accompanied by a veritable earthquake. Florida was
shaken to its very depths. The gases of the powder, expanded by heat, forced back the
atmospheric strata with tremendous violence, passing like a waterspout through the air.
Not one spectator remained on his legs; men, women, and children were thrown down like
ears of wheat in a storm; there was a terrible tumult, and a large number of people were
seriously injured. J.T. Maston, who had very imprudently kept to the fore, was thrown twenty
yards backwards like a bullet over the heads of his fellow-citizens. Three hundred thousand
people were temporarily deafened and as though thunderstruck.
The atmospheric current, after throwing over huts and cabins, uprooting trees within a radius
of twenty miles, throwing the trains off the railway as far as Tampa, burst upon the town like
an avalanche and destroyed a hundred houses, amongst others the church of St. Mary and the
new edifice of the Exchange. Some of the vessels in the port were run against each other and
sunk, and ten of them were stranded high and dry after breaking their chains like threads of
cotton.
But the circle of these devastations extended farther still, and beyond the limits of the United
States. The recoil, aided by the westerly winds, was felt on the Atlantic at more than 300
miles from the American shores. An unexpected tempest, which even Admiral Fitzroy could
not have foreseen, broke upon the ships with unheard-of violence. Several vessels, seized by
a sort of whirlwind before they had time to furl their sails, were sunk, amongst others
the Childe Harold, of Liverpool, a regrettable catastrophe which was the object of lively
recriminations.
Lastly although the fact is not warranted except by the affirmation of a few natives halfan-hour after the departure of the projectile the inhabitants of Sierra-Leone pretended that
they heard a dull noise, the last displacement of the sonorous waves, which, after crossing the
Atlantic, died away on the African coast.
But to return to Florida. The tumult once lessened, the wounded and deaf in short, all the
crowd rose and shouted in a sort of frenzy, “Hurrah for Ardan! Hurrah for Barbicane!
Hurrah for Nicholl!” Several millions of men, nose in air, armed with telescopes and every
species of field-glass, looked into space, forgetting contusions and feelings, in order to look
at the projectile. But they sought in vain; it was not to be seen, and they resolved to await the
telegrams from Long’s Peak. The director of the Cambridge Observatory, M. Belfast, was at
his post in the Rocky Mountains, and it was to this skilful and persevering astronomer that
the observations had been entrusted.
But an unforeseen phenomenon, against which nothing could be done, soon came to put
public impatience to a rude test.
The weather, so fine before, suddenly changed; the sky became covered with clouds. It could
not be otherwise after so great a displacement of the atmospheric strata and the dispersion of
99
the enormous quantity of gases from the combustion of 200,000 lbs. of pyroxyle. All natural
order had been disturbed. There is nothing astonishing in that, for in sea-fights it has been
noticed that the state of the atmosphere has been suddenly changed by the artillery discharge.
The next day the sun rose upon an horizon covered with thick clouds, a heavy and an
impenetrable curtain hung between earth and sky, and which unfortunately extended as far as
the regions of the Rocky Mountains. It was a fatality. A concert of complaints rose from all
parts of the globe. But Nature took no notice, and as men had chosen to disturb the
atmosphere with their gun, they must submit to the consequences.
During this first day every one tried to pierce the thick veil of clouds, but no one was
rewarded for the trouble; besides, they were all mistaken in supposing they could see it by
looking up at the sky, for on account of the diurnal movement of the globe the projectile was
then, of course, shooting past the line of the antipodes.
However that might be, when night again enveloped the earth a dark, impenetrable night 
it was impossible to see the moon above the horizon; it might have been thought that she was
hiding on purpose from the bold beings who had shot at her. No observation was, therefore,
possible, and the despatches from Long’s Peak confirmed the disastrous intelligence.
However, if the experiment had succeeded, the travellers, who had started on the 1st of
December, at 10h. 46m. 40s. p.m., were due at their destination on the 4th at midnight; so that
as up to that time it would, after all, have been difficult to observe a body so small, people
waited with all the patience they could muster.
On the 4th of December, from 8 p.m. till midnight, it would have been possible to follow the
trace of the projectile, which would have appeared like a black speck on the shining disc of
the moon. But the weather remained imperturbably cloudy, and exasperated the public, who
swore at the moon for not showing herself. Sic transit gloria mundi!
J.T. Maston, in despair, set out for Long’s Peak. He wished to make an observation himself.
He did not doubt that his friends had arrived at the goal of their journey. No one had heard
that the projectile had fallen upon any continent or island upon earth, and J.T. Maston did not
admit for a moment that it could have fallen into any of the oceans with which the earth is
three parts covered.
On the 5th the same weather. The large telescopes of the old world those of Herschel,
Rosse, and Foucault were invariably fixed upon the Queen of Night, for the weather was
magnificent in Europe, but the relative weakness of these instruments prevented any useful
observation.
On the 6th the same weather reigned. Impatience devoured three parts of the globe. The most
insane means were proposed for dissipating the clouds accumulated in the air.
On the 7th the sky seemed to clear a little. Hopes revived but did not last long, and in the
evening thick clouds defended the starry vault against all eyes.
Things now became grave. In fact, on the 11th, at 9.11 a.m., the moon would enter her last
quarter. After this delay she would decline every day, and even if the sky should clear the
chances of observation would be considerably lessened in fact, the moon would then show
only a constantly-decreasing portion of her disc, and would end by becoming new that is to
say, she would rise and set with the sun, whose rays would make her quite invisible. They
would, therefore, be obliged to wait till the 3rd of January, at 12.43 p.m., till she would be
full again and ready for observation.
100
The newspapers published these reflections with a thousand commentaries, and did not fail to
tell the public that it must arm itself with angelic patience.
On the 8th no change. On the 9th the sun appeared for a moment, as if to jeer at the
Americans. It was received with hisses, and wounded, doubtless, by such a reception, it was
very miserly of its rays.
On the 10th no change. J.T. Maston nearly went mad, and fears were entertained for his brain
until then so well preserved in its gutta-percha cranium.
But on the 11th one of those frightful tempests peculiar to tropical regions was let loose in the
atmosphere. Terrific east winds swept away the clouds which had been so long there, and in
the evening the half-disc of the moon rode majestically amidst the limpid constellations of the
sky.
101
XXVIII. A New Star
That same night the news so impatiently expected burst like a thunderbolt over the United
States of the Union, and thence darting across the Atlantic it ran along all the telegraphic
wires of the globe. The projectile had been perceived, thanks to the gigantic reflector of
Long’s Peak.
The following is the notice drawn up by the director of the Cambridge Observatory. It
resumes the scientific conclusion of the great experiment made by the Gun Club: 
“Long’s Peak, December 12th.
“To the Staff of the Cambridge Observatory.
“The projectile hurled by the Columbiad of Stony Hill was perceived by Messrs. Belfast and
J.T. Maston on the 12th of December at 8.47 p.m., the moon having entered her last quarter.
“The projectile has not reached its goal. It has deviated to the side, but near enough to be
detained by lunar attraction.
“There its rectilinear movement changed to a circular one of extreme velocity, and it has been
drawn round the moon in an elliptical orbit, and has become her satellite.
“We have not yet been able to determine the elements of this new star. Neither its speed of
translation or rotation is known. The distance which separates it from the surface of the moon
may be estimated at about 2,833 miles.
“Now two hypotheses may be taken into consideration as to a modification in this state of
things: 
“Either the attraction of the moon will end by drawing it towards her, and the travellers will
reach the goal of their journey,
“Or the projectile, maintained in an immutable orbit, will gravitate round the lunar disc till
the end of time.
“Observation will settle this point some day, but until now the experiment of the Gun Club
has had no other result than that of providing our solar system with a new star.
“J BELFAST.”
What discussions this unexpected dénouement gave rise to! What a situation full of mystery
the future reserved for the investigations of science! Thanks to the courage and devotion of
three men, this enterprise of sending a bullet to the moon, futile enough in appearance, had
just had an immense result, the consequences of which are incalculable. The travellers
imprisoned in a new satellite, if they have not attained their end, form at least part of the lunar
world; they gravitate around the Queen of Night, and for the first time human eyes can
penetrate all her mysteries. The names of Nicholl, Barbicane, and Michel Ardan would be for
ever celebrated in astronomical annals, for these bold explorers, desirous of widening the
circle of human knowledge, had audaciously rushed into space, and had risked their lives in
the strangest experiment of modern times.
The notice from Long’s Peak once made known, there spread throughout the universe a
feeling of surprise and horror. Was it possible to go to the aid of these bold inhabitants of the
earth? Certainly not, for they had put themselves outside of the pale of humanity by crossing
the limits imposed by the Creator on His terrestrial creatures. They could procure themselves
102
air for two months; they had provisions for one year; but after? The hardest hearts palpitated
at this terrible question.
One man alone would not admit that the situation was desperate. One alone had confidence,
and it was their friend devoted, audacious, and resolute as they the brave J.T. Maston.
He resolved not to lose sight of them. His domicile was henceforth the post of Long’s Peak 
his horizon the immense reflector. As soon as the moon rose above the horizon he
immediately framed her in the field of his telescope; he did not lose sight of her for an
instant, and assiduously followed her across the stellar spaces; he watched with eternal
patience the passage of the projectile over her disc of silver, and in reality the worthy man
remained in perpetual communication with his three friends, whom he did not despair of
seeing again one day.
“We will correspond with them,” said he to any one who would listen, “as soon as
circumstances will allow. We shall have news from them, and they will have news from us.
Besides, I know them they are ingenious men. Those three carry with them into space all
the resources of art, science, and industry. With those everything can be accomplished, and
you will see that they will get out of the difficulty.”

On the 26th of July, 1864, a magnificent yacht was steaming along the
North Channel at full speed, with a strong breeze blowing from the N. E. The
Union Jack was flying at the mizzen-mast, and a blue standard bearing the
initials E. G., embroidered in gold, and surmounted by a ducal coronet, floated
from the topgallant head of the main-mast. The name of the yacht was the
DUNCAN, and the owner was Lord Glenarvan, one of the sixteen Scotch
peers who sit in the Upper House, and the most distinguished member of the
Royal Thames Yacht Club, so famous throughout the United Kingdom.
Lord Edward Glenarvan was on board with his young wife, Lady Helena,
and one of his cousins, Major McNabbs.
The DUNCAN was newly built, and had been making a trial trip a few
miles outside the Firth of Clyde. She was returning to Glasgow, and the Isle of
Arran already loomed in the distance, when the sailor on watch caught sight of
an enormous fish sporting in the wake of the ship. Lord Edward, who was
immediately apprised of the fact, came up on the poop a few minutes after
with his cousin, and asked John Mangles, the captain, what sort of an animal
he thought it was.
“Well, since your Lordship asks my opinion,” said Mangles, “I think it is a
shark, and a fine large one too.”
“A shark on these shores!”
“There is nothing at all improbable in that,” returned the captain. “This fish
belongs to a species that is found in all latitudes and in all seas. It is the
‘balance-fish,’ or hammer-headed shark, if I am not much mistaken. But if
your Lordship has no objections, and it would give the smallest pleasure to
Lady Helena to see a novelty in the way of fishing, we’ll soon haul up the
monster and find out what it really is.”
“What do you say, McNabbs? Shall we try to catch it?” asked Lord
Glenarvan.
“If you like; it’s all one to me,” was his cousin’s cool reply.
“The more of those terrible creatures that are killed the better, at all
events,” said John Mangles, “so let’s seize the chance, and it will not only give
us a little diversion, but be doing a good action.”
“Very well, set to work, then,” said Glenarvan.
Lady Helena soon joined her husband on deck, quite charmed at the
prospect of such exciting sport. The sea was splendid, and every movement of
the shark was distinctly visible. In obedience to the captain’s orders, the sailors
threw a strong rope over the starboard side of the yacht, with a big hook at the
end of it, concealed in a thick lump of bacon. The bait took at once, though the
shark was full fifty yards distant. He began to make rapidly for the yacht,
beating the waves violently with his fins, and keeping his tail in a perfectly
straight line. As he got nearer, his great projecting eyes could be seen inflamed
with greed, and his gaping jaws with their quadruple row of teeth. His head
was large, and shaped like a double hammer at the end of a handle. John
Mangles was right. This was evidently a balance-fish—the most voracious of
all the SQUALIDAE species.
The passengers and sailors on the yacht were watching all the animal’s
movements with the liveliest interest. He soon came within reach of the bait,
turned over on his back to make a good dart at it, and in a second bacon and
contents had disappeared. He had hooked himself now, as the tremendous jerk
he gave the cable proved, and the sailors began to haul in the monster by
means of tackle attached to the mainyard. He struggled desperately, but his
captors were prepared for his violence, and had a long rope ready with a slip
knot, which caught his tail and rendered him powerless at once. In a few
minutes more he was hoisted up over the side of the yacht and thrown on the
deck. A man came forward immediately, hatchet in hand, and approaching him
cautiously, with one powerful stroke cut off his tail.
This ended the business, for there was no longer any fear of the shark. But,
though the sailors’ vengeance was satisfied, their curiosity was not; they knew
the brute had no very delicate appetite, and the contents of his stomach might
be worth investigation. This is the common practice on all ships when a shark
is captured, but Lady Glenarvan declined to be present at such a disgusting
exploration, and withdrew to the cabin again. The fish was still breathing; it
measured ten feet in length, and weighed more than six hundred pounds. This
was nothing extraordinary, for though the hammer-headed shark is not classed
among the most gigantic of the species, it is always reckoned among the most
formidable.
The huge brute was soon ripped up in a very unceremonious fashion. The
hook had fixed right in the stomach, which was found to be absolutely empty,
and the disappointed sailors were just going to throw the remains overboard,
when the boatswain’s attention was attracted by some large object sticking fast
in one of the viscera.
“I say! what’s this?” he exclaimed.
“That!” replied one of the sailors, “why, it’s a piece of rock the beast
swallowed by way of ballast.”
“It’s just a bottle, neither more nor less, that the fellow has got in his
inside, and couldn’t digest,” said another of the crew.
“Hold your tongues, all of you!” said Tom Austin, the mate of the
DUNCAN. “Don’t you see the animal has been such an inveterate tippler that
he has not only drunk the wine, but swallowed the bottle?”
“What!” said Lord Glenarvan. “Do you mean to say it is a bottle that the
shark has got in his stomach.”
“Ay, it is a bottle, most certainly,” replied the boatswain, “but not just from
the cellar.”
“Well, Tom, be careful how you take it out,” said Lord Glenarvan, “for
bottles found in the sea often contain precious documents.”
“Do you think this does?” said Major McNabbs, incredulously.
“It possibly may, at any rate.”
“Oh! I’m not saying it doesn’t. There may perhaps be some secret in it,”
returned the Major.
“That’s just what we’re to see,” said his cousin. “Well, Tom.”
“Here it is,” said the mate, holding up a shapeless lump he had managed to
pull out, though with some difficulty.
“Get the filthy thing washed then, and bring it to the cabin.”
Tom obeyed, and in a few minutes brought in the bottle and laid it on the
table, at which Lord Glenarvan and the Major were sitting ready with the
captain, and, of course Lady Helena, for women, they say, are always a little
curious. Everything is an event at sea. For a moment they all sat silent, gazing
at this frail relic, wondering if it told the tale of sad disaster, or brought some
trifling message from a frolic-loving sailor, who had flung it into the sea to
amuse himself when he had nothing better to do.
However, the only way to know was to examine the bottle, and Glenarvan
set to work without further delay, so carefully and minutely, that he might have
been taken for a coroner making an inquest.
He commenced by a close inspection of the outside. The neck was long
and slender, and round the thick rim there was still an end of wire hanging,
though eaten away with rust. The sides were very thick, and strong enough to
bear great pressure. It was evidently of Champagne origin, and the Major said
immediately, “That’s one of our Clicquot’s bottles.”
Nobody contradicted him, as he was supposed to know; but Lady Helena
exclaimed, “What does it matter about the bottle, if we don’t know where it
comes from?”
“We shall know that, too, presently, and we may affirm this much already
—it comes from a long way off. Look at those petrifactions all over it, these
different substances almost turned to mineral, we might say, through the action
of the salt water! This waif had been tossing about in the ocean a long time
before the shark swallowed it.”
“I quite agree with you,” said McNabbs. “I dare say this frail concern has
made a long voyage, protected by this strong covering.”
“But I want to know where from?” said Lady Glenarvan.
“Wait a little, dear Helena, wait; we must have patience with bottles; but if
I am not much mistaken, this one will answer all our questions,” replied her
husband, beginning to scrape away the hard substances round the neck. Soon
the cork made its appearance, but much damaged by the water.
“That’s vexing,” said Lord Edward, “for if papers are inside, they’ll be in a
pretty state!”
“It’s to be feared they will,” said the Major.
“But it is a lucky thing the shark swallowed them, I must say,” added
Glenarvan, “for the bottle would have sunk to the bottom before long with
such a cork as this.”
“That’s true enough,” replied John Mangles, “and yet it would have been
better to have fished them up in the open sea. Then we might have found out
the road they had come by taking the exact latitude and longitude, and
studying the atmospheric and submarine currents; but with such a postman as
a shark, that goes against wind and tide, there’s no clew whatever to the
starting-point.”
“We shall see,” said Glenarvan, gently taking out the cork. A strong odor
of salt water pervaded the whole saloon, and Lady Helena asked impatiently:
“Well, what is there?”
“I was right!” exclaimed Glenarvan. “I see papers inside. But I fear it will
be impossible to remove them,” he added, “for they appear to have rotted with
the damp, and are sticking to the sides of the bottle.”
“Break it,” said the Major.
“I would rather preserve the whole if I could.”
“No doubt you would,” said Lady Helena; “but the contents are more
valuable than the bottle, and we had better sacrifice the one than the other.”
“If your Lordship would simply break off the neck, I think we might easily
withdraw the papers,” suggested John Mangles.
“Try it, Edward, try it,” said Lady Helena.
Lord Glenarvan was very unwilling, but he found there was no alternative;
the precious bottle must be broken. They had to get a hammer before this
could be done, though, for the stony material had acquired the hardness of
granite. A few sharp strokes, however, soon shivered it to fragments, many of
which had pieces of paper sticking to them. These were carefully removed by
Lord Glenarvan, and separated and spread out on the table before the eager
gaze of his wife and friends.
CHAPTER II THE THREE DOCUMENTS
All that could be discovered, however, on these pieces of paper was a few
words here and there, the remainder of the lines being almost completely
obliterated by the action of the water. Lord Glenarvan examined them
attentively for a few minutes, turning them over on all sides, holding them up
to the light, and trying to decipher the least scrap of writing, while the others
looked on with anxious eyes. At last he said: “There are three distinct
documents here, apparently copies of the same document in three different
languages. Here is one in English, one in French, and one in German.”
“But can you make any sense out of them?” asked Lady Helena.
“That’s hard to say, my dear Helena, the words are quite incomplete.”
“Perhaps the one may supplement the other,” suggested Major McNabbs.
“Very likely they will,” said the captain. “It is impossible that the very
same words should have been effaced in each document, and by putting the
scraps together we might gather some intelligible meaning out of them.”
“That’s what we will do,” rejoined Lord Glenarvan; “but let us proceed
methodically. Here is the English document first.”
All that remained of it was the following:
62 Bri gow
sink stra
aland
skipp Gr
that monit of long
and ssistance
lost
“There’s not much to be made out of that,” said the Major, looking
disappointed.
“No, but it is good English anyhow,” returned the captain.
“There’s no doubt of it,” said Glenarvan. “The words SINK, ALAND,
LOST are entire; SKIPP is evidently part of the word SKIPPER, and that’s
what they call ship captains often in England. There seems a Mr. Gr.
mentioned, and that most likely is the captain of the shipwrecked vessel.”
“Well, come, we have made out a good deal already,” said Lady Helena.
“Yes, but unfortunately there are whole lines wanting,” said the Major,
“and we have neither the name of the ship nor the place where she was
shipwrecked.”
“We’ll get that by and by,” said Edward.
“Oh, yes; there is no doubt of it,” replied the Major, who always echoed
his neighbor’s opinion. “But how?”
“By comparing one document with the other.”
“Let us try them,” said his wife.
The second piece of paper was even more destroyed than the first; only a
few scattered words remained here and there.
It ran as follows:
7 Juni Glas
zwei atrosen
graus
bringt ihnen
“This is written in German,” said John Mangles the moment he looked at
it.
“And you understand that language, don’t you?” asked Lord Glenarvan.
“Perfectly.”
“Come, then, tell us the meaning of these words.”
The captain examined the document carefully, and said:
“Well, here’s the date of the occurrence first: 7 Juni means June 7; and if
we put that before the figures 62 we have in the other document, it gives us the
exact date, 7th of June, 1862.”
“Capital!” exclaimed Lady Helena. “Go on, John!”
“On the same line,” resumed the young captain, “there is the syllable
GLAS and if we add that to the GOW we found in the English paper, we get
the whole word GLASGOW at once. The documents evidently refer to some
ship that sailed out of the port of Glasgow.”
“That is my opinion, too,” said the Major.
“The second line is completely effaced,” continued the Captain; “but here
are two important words on the third. There is ZWEI, which means TWO, and
ATROSEN or MATROSEN, the German for SAILORS.”
“Then I suppose it is about a captain and two sailors,” said Lady Helena.
“It seems so,” replied Lord Glenarvan.
“I must confess, your Lordship, that the next word puzzles me. I can make
nothing of it. Perhaps the third document may throw some light on it. The last
two words are plain enough. BRINGT IHNEN means BRING THEM; and, if
you recollect, in the English paper we had SSISTANCE, so by putting the
parts together, it reads thus, I think: ‘BRING THEM ASSISTANCE.’”
“Yes, that must be it,” replied Lord Glenarvan. “But where are the poor
fellows? We have not the slightest indication of the place, meantime, nor of
where the catastrophe happened.”
“Perhaps the French copy will be more explicit,” suggested Lady Helena.
“Here it is, then,” said Lord Glenarvan, “and that is in a language we all
know.”
The words it contained were these:
troi ats tannia
gonie austral
abor
contin pr cruel indi
jete ongit
et 37 degrees 11” LAT
“There are figures!” exclaimed Lady Helena. “Look!”
“Let us go steadily to work,” said Lord Glenarvan, “and begin at the
beginning. I think we can make out from the incomplete words in the first line
that a three-mast vessel is in question, and there is little doubt about the name;
we get that from the fragments of the other papers; it is the BRITANNIA. As
to the next two words, GONIE and AUSTRAL, it is only AUSTRAL that has
any meaning to us.”
“But that is a valuable scrap of information,” said John Mangles. “The
shipwreck occurred in the southern hemisphere.”
“That’s a wide world,” said the Major.
“Well, we’ll go on,” resumed Glenarvan. “Here is the word ABOR; that is
clearly the root of the verb ABORDER. The poor men have landed
somewhere; but where? CONTIN—does that mean continent? CRUEL!”
“CRUEL!” interrupted John Mangles. “I see now what GRAUS is part of
in the second document. It is GRAUSAM, the word in German for CRUEL!”
“Let’s go on,” said Lord Glenarvan, becoming quite excited over his task,
as the incomplete words began to fill up and develop their meaning. “INDI,—
is it India where they have been shipwrecked? And what can this word
ONGIT be part of? Ah! I see—it is LONGITUDE; and here is the latitude, 37
degrees 11”. That is the precise indication at last, then!”
“But we haven’t the longitude,” objected McNabbs.
“But we can’t get everything, my dear Major; and it is something at all
events, to have the exact latitude. The French document is decidedly the most
complete of the three; but it is plain enough that each is the literal translation
of the other, for they all contain exactly the same number of lines. What we
have to do now is to put together all the words we have found, and translate
them into one language, and try to ascertain their most probable and logical
sense.”
“Well, what language shall we choose?” asked the Major.
“I think we had better keep to the French, since that was the most complete
document of the three.”
“Your Lordship is right,” said John Mangles, “and besides, we’re all
familiar with the language.”
“Very well, then, I’ll set to work.”
In a few minutes he had written as follows:
7 Juin 1862 trois-mats Britannia Glasgow
sombre gonie austral
a terre deux matelots
capitaine Gr abor
contin pr cruel indi
jete ce document de longitude
et 37 degrees 11” de latitude Portez-leur secours
perdus.
[7th of June, 1862 three-mast BRITANNIA Glasgow]
foundered gonie southern
on the coast two sailors Gr
Captain landed
contin pr cruel indi
thrown this document in longitude
and 37 degrees 11” latitude Bring them assistance
lost
Just at that moment one of the sailors came to inform the captain that they
were about entering the Firth of Clyde, and to ask what were his orders.
“What are your Lordship’s intentions?” said John Mangles, addressing
Lord Glenarvan.
“To get to Dunbarton as quickly as possible, John; and Lady Helena will
return to Malcolm Castle, while I go on to London and lay this document
before the Admiralty.”
The sailor received orders accordingly, and went out to deliver them to the
mate.
“Now, friends,” said Lord Glenarvan, “let us go on with our investigations,
for we are on the track of a great catastrophe, and the lives of several human
beings depend on our sagacity. We must give our whole minds to the solution
of this enigma.”
“First of all, there are three very distinct things to be considered in this
document—the things we know, the things we may conjecture, the things we
do not know.”
“What are those we know? We know that on the 7th of June a three-mast
vessel, the BRITANNIA of Glasgow, foundered; that two sailors and the
captain threw this document into the sea in 37 degrees 11” latitude, and they
entreat help.”
“Exactly so,” said the Major.
“What are those now we may conjecture?” continued Glenarvan. “That the
shipwreck occurred in the southern seas; and here I would draw your attention
at once to the incomplete word GONIE. Doesn’t the name of the country strike
you even in the mere mention of it?”
“Patagonia!” exclaimed Lady Helena.
“Undoubtedly.”
“But is Patagonia crossed by the 37th parallel?” asked the Major.
“That is easily ascertained,” said the captain, opening a map of South
America. “Yes, it is; Patagonia just touches the 37th parallel. It cuts through
Araucania, goes along over the Pampas to the north, and loses itself in the
Atlantic.”
“Well, let us proceed then with our conjectures. The two sailors and the
captain LAND—land where? CONTIN—on a continent; on a continent, mark
you, not an island. What becomes of them? There are two letters here
providentially which give a clew to their fate—PR, that must mean prisoners,
and CRUEL INDIAN is evidently the meaning of the next two words. These
unfortunate men are captives in the hands of cruel Indians. Don’t you see it?
Don’t the words seem to come of themselves, and fill up the blanks? Isn’t the
document quite clear now? Isn’t the sense self-evident?”
Glenarvan spoke in a tone of absolute conviction, and his enthusiastic
confidence appeared contagious, for the others all exclaimed, too, “Yes, it is
evident, quite evident!”
After an instant, Lord Edward said again, “To my own mind the hypothesis
is so plausible, that I have no doubt whatever the event occurred on the coast
of Patagonia, but still I will have inquiries made in Glasgow, as to the
destination of the BRITANNIA, and we shall know if it is possible she could
have been wrecked on those shores.”
“Oh, there’s no need to send so far to find out that,” said John Mangles. “I
have the Mercantile and Shipping Gazette here, and we’ll see the name on the
list, and all about it.”
“Do look at once, then,” said Lord Glenarvan.
The file of papers for the year 1862 was soon brought, and John began to
turn over the leaves rapidly, running down each page with his eye in search of
the name required. But his quest was not long, for in a few minutes he called
out: “I’ve got it! ‘May 30, 1862, Peru-Callao, with cargo for Glasgow, the
BRITANNIA, Captain Grant.’”
“Grant!” exclaimed Lord Glenarvan. “That is the adventurous Scotchman
that attempted to found a new Scotland on the shores of the Pacific.”
“Yes,” rejoined John Mangles, “it is the very man. He sailed from Glasgow
in the BRITANNIA in 1861, and has not been heard of since.”
“There isn’t a doubt of it, not a shadow of doubt,” repeated Lord
Glenarvan. “It is just that same Captain Grant. The BRITANNIA left Callao
on the 30th of May, and on the 7th of June, a week afterward, she is lost on the
coast of Patagonia. The few broken disjointed words we find in these
documents tell us the whole story. You see, friends, our conjectures hit the
mark very well; we know all now except one thing, and that is the longitude.”
“That is not needed now, we know the country. With the latitude alone, I
would engage to go right to the place where the wreck happened.”
“Then have we really all the particulars now?” asked Lady Helena.
“All, dear Helena; I can fill up every one of these blanks the sea has made
in the document as easily as if Captain Grant were dictating to me.”
And he took up the pen, and dashed off the following lines immediately:
“On the 7th of June, 1862, the three-mast vessel, BRITANNIA, of Glasgow,
has sunk on the coast of Patagonia, in the southern hemisphere. Making for the
shore, two sailors and Captain Grant are about to land on the continent, where
they will be taken prisoners by cruel Indians. They have thrown this document
into the sea, in longitude and latitude 37 degrees 11”. Bring them assistance,
or they are lost.”
“Capital! capital! dear Edward,” said Lady Helena. “If those poor creatures
ever see their native land again, it is you they will have to thank for it.”
“And they will see it again,” returned Lord Glenarvan; “the statement is
too explicit, and clear, and certain for England to hesitate about going to the
aid of her three sons cast away on a desert coast. What she has done for
Franklin and so many others, she will do to-day for these poor shipwrecked
fellows of the BRITANNIA.”
“Most likely the unfortunate men have families who mourn their loss.
Perhaps this ill-fated Captain Grant had a wife and children,” suggested Lady
Helena.
“Very true, my dear, and I’ll not forget to let them know that there is still
hope. But now, friends, we had better go up on deck, as the boat must be
getting near the harbor.”
A carriage and post-horses waited there, in readiness to convey Lady
Helena and Major McNabbs to Malcolm Castle, and Lord Glenarvan bade
adieu to his young wife, and jumped into the express train for Glasgow.
But before starting he confided an important missive to a swifter agent
than himself, and a few minutes afterward it flashed along the electric wire to
London, to appear next day in the Times and Morning Chronicle in the
following words: “For information respecting the fate of the three-mast vessel
BRITANNIA, of Glasgow, Captain Grant, apply to Lord Glenarvan, Malcolm
Castle, Luss, Dumbartonshire, Scotland.”
CHAPTER III THE CAPTAIN’S CHILDREN
Lord Glenarvan’s fortune was enormous, and he spent it entirely in doing
good. His kindheartedness was even greater than his generosity, for the one
knew no bounds, while the other, of necessity, had its limits. As Lord of Luss
and “laird” of Malcolm, he represented his county in the House of Lords; but,
with his Jacobite ideas, he did not care much for the favor of the House of
Hanover, and he was looked upon coldly by the State party in England,
because of the tenacity with which he clung to the traditions of his forefathers,
and his energetic resistance to the political encroachments of Southerners. And
yet he was not a man behind the times, and there was nothing little or narrowminded about him; but while always keeping open his ancestral county to
progress, he was a true Scotchman at heart, and it was for the honor of
Scotland that he competed in the yacht races of the Royal Thames Yacht Club.
Edward Glenarvan was thirty-two years of age. He was tall in person, and
had rather stern features; but there was an exceeding sweetness in his look,
and a stamp of Highland poetry about his whole bearing. He was known to be
brave to excess, and full of daring and chivalry—a Fer-gus of the nineteenth
century; but his goodness excelled every other quality, and he was more
charitable than St. Martin himself, for he would have given the whole of his
cloak to any of the poor Highlanders.
He had scarcely been married three months, and his bride was Miss Helena
Tuffnell, the daughter of William Tuffnell, the great traveler, one of the many
victims of geographical science and of the passion for discovery. Miss Helena
did not belong to a noble family, but she was Scotch, and that was better than
all nobility in the eyes of Lord Glenarvan; and she was, moreover, a charming,
high-souled, religious young woman.
Lord Glenarvan did not forget that his wife was the daughter of a great
traveler, and he thought it likely that she would inherit her father’s
predilections. He had the DUNCAN built expressly that he might take his
bride to the most beautiful lands in the world, and complete their honeymoon
by sailing up the Mediterranean, and through the clustering islands of the
Archipelago.
However, Lord Glenarvan had gone now to London. The lives of the
shipwrecked men were at stake, and Lady Helena was too much concerned
herself about them to grudge her husband’s temporary absence. A telegram
next day gave hope of his speedy return, but in the evening a letter apprised
her of the difficulties his proposition had met with, and the morning after
brought another, in which he openly expressed his dissatisfaction with the
Admiralty.
Lady Helena began to get anxious as the day wore on. In the evening,
when she was sitting alone in her room, Mr. Halbert, the house steward, came
in and asked if she would see a young girl and boy that wanted to speak to
Lord Glenarvan.
“Some of the country people?” asked Lady Helena.
“No, madame,” replied the steward, “I do not know them at all. They came
by rail to Balloch, and walked the rest of the way to Luss.”
“Tell them to come up, Halbert.”
In a few minutes a girl and boy were shown in. They were evidently
brother and sister, for the resemblance was unmistakable. The girl was about
sixteen years of age; her tired pretty face, and sorrowful eyes, and resigned but
courageous look, as well as her neat though poor attire, made a favorable
impression. The boy she held by the hand was about twelve, but his face
expressed such determination, that he appeared quite his sister’s protector.
The girl seemed too shy to utter a word at first, but Lady Helena quickly
relieved her embarrassment by saying, with an encouraging smile: “You wish
to speak to me, I think?”
“No,” replied the boy, in a decided tone; “not to you, but to Lord
Glenarvan.”
“Excuse him, ma’am,” said the girl, with a look at her brother.
“Lord Glenarvan is not at the castle just now,” returned Lady Helena; “but
I am his wife, and if I can do anything for you—”
“You are Lady Glenarvan?” interrupted the girl.
“I am.”
“The wife of Lord Glenarvan, of Malcolm Castle, that put an
announcement in the TIMES about the shipwreck of the BRITANNIA?”
“Yes, yes,” said Lady Helena, eagerly; “and you?”
“I am Miss Grant, ma’am, and this is my brother.”
“Miss Grant, Miss Grant!” exclaimed Lady Helena, drawing the young girl
toward her, and taking both her hands and kissing the boy’s rosy cheeks.
“What is it you know, ma’am, about the shipwreck? Tell me, is my father
living? Shall we ever see him again? Oh, tell me,” said the girl, earnestly.
“My dear child,” replied Lady Helena. “Heaven forbid that I should answer
you lightly such a question; I would not delude you with vain hopes.”
“Oh, tell me all, tell me all, ma’am. I’m proof against sorrow. I can bear to
hear anything.”
“My poor child, there is but a faint hope; but with the help of almighty
Heaven it is just possible you may one day see your father once more.”
The girl burst into tears, and Robert seized Lady Glenarvan’s hand and
covered it with kisses.
As soon as they grew calmer they asked a complete string of questions,
and Lady Helena recounted the whole story of the document, telling them that
their father had been wrecked on the coast of Patagonia, and that he and two
sailors, the sole survivors, appeared to have reached the shore, and had written
an appeal for help in three languages and committed it to the care of the
waves.
During the recital, Robert Grant was devouring the speaker with his eyes,
and hanging on her lips. His childish imagination evidently retraced all the
scenes of his father’s shipwreck. He saw him on the deck of the BRITANNIA,
and then struggling with the billows, then clinging to the rocks, and lying at
length exhausted on the beach.
More than once he cried out, “Oh, papa! my poor papa!” and pressed close
to his sister.
Miss Grant sat silent and motionless, with clasped hands, and all she said
when the narration ended, was: “Oh, ma’am, the paper, please!”
“I have not it now, my dear child,” replied Lady Helena.
“You haven’t it?”
“No. Lord Glenarvan was obliged to take it to London, for the sake of your
father; but I have told you all it contained, word for word, and how we
managed to make out the complete sense from the fragments of words left—
all except the longitude, unfortunately.”
“We can do without that,” said the boy.
“Yes, Mr. Robert,” rejoined Lady Helena, smiling at the child’s decided
tone. “And so you see, Miss Grant, you know the smallest details now just as
well as I do.”
“Yes, ma’am, but I should like to have seen my father’s writing.”
“Well, to-morrow, perhaps, to-morrow, Lord Glenarvan will be back. My
husband determined to lay the document before the Lords of the Admiralty, to
induce them to send out a ship immediately in search of Captain Grant.”
“Is it possible, ma’am,” exclaimed the girl, “that you have done that for
us?”
“Yes, my dear Miss Grant, and I am expecting Lord Glenarvan back every
minute now.”
“Oh, ma’am! Heaven bless you and Lord Glenarvan,” said the young girl,
fervently, overcome with grateful emotion.
“My dear girl, we deserve no thanks; anyone in our place would have done
the same. I only trust the hopes we are leading you to entertain may be
realized, but till my husband returns, you will remain at the Castle.”
“Oh, no, ma’am. I could not abuse the sympathy you show to strangers.”
“Strangers, dear child!” interrupted Lady Helena; “you and your brother
are not strangers in this house, and I should like Lord Glenarvan to be able on
his arrival to tell the children of Captain Grant himself, what is going to be
done to rescue their father.”
It was impossible to refuse an invitation given with such heart, and Miss
Grant and her brother consented to stay till Lord Glenarvan returned.
CHAPTER IV LADY GLENARVAN’S PROPOSAL
Lady Helena thought it best to say nothing to the children about the fears
Lord Glenarvan had expressed in his letters respecting the decisions of the
Lords of the Admiralty with regard to the document. Nor did she mention the
probable captivity of Captain Grant among the Indians of South America.
Why sadden the poor children, and damp their newly cherished hopes? It
would not in the least alter the actual state of the case; so not a word was said,
and after answering all Miss Grant’s questions, Lady Helena began to
interrogate in her turn, asking her about her past life and her present
circumstances.
It was a touching, simple story she heard in reply, and one which increased
her sympathy for the young girl.
Mary and Robert were the captain’s only children. Harry Grant lost his
wife when Robert was born, and during his long voyages he left his little ones
in charge of his cousin, a good old lady. Captain Grant was a fearless sailor.
He not only thoroughly understood navigation, but commerce also—a twofold qualification eminently useful to skippers in the merchant service. He
lived in Dundee, in Perthshire, Scotland. His father, a minister of St. Katrine’s
Church, had given him a thorough education, as he believed that could never
hurt anybody.
Harry’s voyages were prosperous from the first, and a few years after
Robert was born, he found himself possessed of a considerable fortune.
It was then that he projected the grand scheme which made him popular in
Scotland. Like Glenarvan, and a few noble families in the Lowlands, he had
no heart for the union with England. In his eyes the interests of his country
were not identified with those of the Anglo-Saxons, and to give scope for
personal development, he resolved to found an immense Scotch colony on one
of the ocean continents. Possibly he might have thought that some day they
would achieve their independence, as the United States did—an example
doubtless to be followed eventually by Australia and India. But whatever
might be his secret motives, such was his dream of colonization. But, as is
easily understood, the Government opposed his plans, and put difficulties
enough in his way to have killed an ordinary man. But Harry would not be
beaten. He appealed to the patriotism of his countrymen, placed his fortune at
the service of the cause, built a ship, and manned it with a picked crew, and
leaving his children to the care of his old cousin set off to explore the great
islands of the Pacific. This was in 1861, and for twelve months, or up to May,
1862, letters were regularly received from him, but no tidings whatever had
come since his departure from Callao, in June, and the name of the
BRITANNIA never appeared in the Shipping List.
Just at this juncture the old cousin died, and Harry Grant’s two children
were left alone in the world.
Mary Grant was then only fourteen, but she resolved to face her situation
bravely, and to devote herself entirely to her little brother, who was still a mere
child. By dint of close economy, combined with tact and prudence, she
managed to support and educate him, working day and night, denying herself
everything, that she might give him all he needed, watching over him and
caring for him like a mother.
The two children were living in this touching manner in Dundee,
struggling patiently and courageously with their poverty. Mary thought only of
her brother, and indulged in dreams of a prosperous future for him. She had
long given up all hope of the BRITANNIA, and was fully persuaded that her
father was dead. What, then, was her emotion when she accidentally saw the
notice in the TIMES!
She never hesitated for an instant as to the course she should adopt, but
determined to go to Dumbartonshire immediately, to learn the best and worst.
Even if she were to be told that her father’s lifeless body had been found on a
distant shore, or in the bottom of some abandoned ship, it would be a relief
from incessant doubt and torturing suspense.
She told her brother about the advertisement, and the two children started
off together that same day for Perth, where they took the train, and arrived in
the evening at Malcolm Castle.
Such was Mary Grant’s sorrowful story, and she recounted it in so simple
and unaffected a manner, that it was evident she never thought her conduct had
been that of a heroine through those long trying years. But Lady Helena
thought it for her, and more than once she put her arms round both the
children, and could not restrain her tears.
As for Robert, he seemed to have heard these particulars for the first time.
All the while his sister was speaking, he gazed at her with wide-open eyes,
only knowing now how much she had done and suffered for him; and, as she
ended, he flung himself on her neck, and exclaimed, “Oh, mamma! My dear
little mamma!”
It was quite dark by this time, and Lady Helena made the children go to
bed, for she knew they must be tired after their journey. They were soon both
sound asleep, dreaming of happy days.
After they had retired. Lady Helena sent for Major McNabbs, and told him
the incidents of the evening.
“That Mary Grant must be a brave girl,” said the Major.
“I only hope my husband will succeed, for the poor children’s sake,” said
his cousin. “It would be terrible for them if he did not.”
“He will be sure to succeed, or the Lords of the Admiralty must have
hearts harder than Portland stone.”
But, notwithstanding McNabbs’s assurance, Lady Helena passed the night
in great anxiety, and could not close her eyes.
Mary Grant and her brother were up very early next morning, and were
walking about in the courtyard when they heard the sound of a carriage
approaching. It was Lord Glenarvan; and, almost immediately, Lady Helena
and the Major came out to meet him.
Lady Helena flew toward her husband the moment he alighted; but he
embraced her silently, and looked gloomy and disappointed—indeed, even
furious.
“Well, Edward?” she said; “tell me.”
“Well, Helena, dear; those people have no heart!”
“They have refused?”
“Yes. They have refused me a ship! They talked of the millions that had
been wasted in search for Franklin, and declared the document was obscure
and unintelligible. And, then, they said it was two years now since they were
cast away, and there was little chance of finding them. Besides, they would
have it that the Indians, who made them prisoners, would have dragged them
into the interior, and it was impossible, they said, to hunt all through Patagonia
for three men—three Scotchmen; that the search would be vain and perilous,
and cost more lives than it saved. In short, they assigned all the reasons that
people invent who have made up their minds to refuse. The truth is, they
remembered Captain Grant’s projects, and that is the secret of the whole affair.
So the poor fellow is lost for ever.”
“My father! my poor father!” cried Mary Grant, throwing herself on her
knees before Lord Glenarvan, who exclaimed in amazement:
“Your father? What? Is this Miss—”
“Yes, Edward,” said Lady Helena; “this is Miss Mary Grant and her
brother, the two children condemned to orphanage by the cruel Admiralty!”
“Oh! Miss Grant,” said Lord Glenarvan, raising the young girl, “if I had
known of your presence—”
He said no more, and there was a painful silence in the courtyard, broken
only by sobs. No one spoke, but the very attitude of both servants and masters
spoke their indignation at the conduct of the English Government.
At last the Major said, addressing Lord Glenarvan: “Then you have no
hope whatever?”
“None,” was the reply.
“Very well, then,” exclaimed little Robert, “I’ll go and speak to those
people myself, and we’ll see if they—” He did not complete his sentence, for
his sister stopped him; but his clenched fists showed his intentions were the
reverse of pacific.
“No, Robert,” said Mary Grant, “we will thank this noble lord and lady for
what they have done for us, and never cease to think of them with gratitude;
and then we’ll both go together.”
“Mary!” said Lady Helena, in a tone of surprise.
“Go where?” asked Lord Glenarvan.
“I am going to throw myself at the Queen’s feet, and we shall see if she
will turn a deaf ear to the prayers of two children, who implore their father’s
life.”
Lord Glenarvan shook his head; not that he doubted the kind heart of her
Majesty, but he knew Mary would never gain access to her. Suppliants but too
rarely reach the steps of a throne; it seems as if royal palaces had the same
inscription on their doors that the English have on their ships: Passengers are
requested not to speak to the man at the wheel.
Lady Glenarvan understood what was passing in her husband’s mind, and
she felt the young girl’s attempt would be useless, and only plunge the poor
children in deeper despair. Suddenly, a grand, generous purpose fired her soul,
and she called out: “Mary Grant! wait, my child, and listen to what I’m going
to say.”
Mary had just taken her brother by the hand, and turned to go away; but
she stepped back at Lady Helena’s bidding.
The young wife went up to her husband, and said, with tears in her eyes,
though her voice was firm, and her face beamed with animation: “Edward,
when Captain Grant wrote that letter and threw it into the sea, he committed it
to the care of God. God has sent it to us—to us! Undoubtedly God intends us
to undertake the rescue of these poor men.”
“What do you mean, Helena?”
“I mean this, that we ought to think ourselves fortunate if we can begin our
married life with a good action. Well, you know, Edward, that to please me
you planned a pleasure trip; but what could give us such genuine pleasure, or
be so useful, as to save those unfortunate fellows, cast off by their country?”
“Helena!” exclaimed Lord Glenarvan.
“Yes, Edward, you understand me. The DUNCAN is a good strong ship,
she can venture in the Southern Seas, or go round the world if necessary. Let
us go, Edward; let us start off and search for Captain Grant!”
Lord Glenarvan made no reply to this bold proposition, but smiled, and,
holding out his arms, drew his wife into a close, fond embrace. Mary and
Robert seized her hands, and covered them with kisses; and the servants who
thronged the courtyard, and had been witnesses of this touching scene, shouted
with one voice, “Hurrah for the Lady of Luss. Three cheers for Lord and Lady
Glenarvan!”
CHAPTER V THE DEPARTURE OF THE “DUNCAN”
We have said already that Lady Helena was a brave, generous woman, and
what she had just done proved it in-disputably. Her husband had good reason
to be proud of such a wife, one who could understand and enter into all his
views. The idea of going to Captain Grant’s rescue had occurred to him in
London when his request was refused, and he would have anticipated Lady
Helena, only he could not bear the thought of parting from her. But now that
she herself proposed to go, all hesitation was at an end. The servants of the
Castle had hailed the project with loud acclamations—for it was to save their
brothers—Scotchmen, like themselves—and Lord Glenarvan cordially joined
his cheers with theirs, for the Lady of Luss.
The departure once resolved upon, there was not an hour to be lost. A
telegram was dispatched to John Mangles the very same day, conveying Lord
Glenarvan’s orders to take the DUNCAN immediately to Glasgow, and to
make preparations for a voyage to the Southern Seas, and possibly round the
world, for Lady Helena was right in her opinion that the yacht might safely
attempt the circumnavigation of the globe, if necessary.
The DUNCAN was a steam yacht of the finest description. She was 210
tons burden—much larger than any of the first vessels that touched the shores
of the New World, for the largest of the four ships that sailed with Columbus
was only 70 tons. She had two masts and all the sails and rigging of an
ordinary clipper, which would enable her to take advantage of every favorable
wind, though her chief reliance was on her mechanical power. The engine,
which was constructed on a new system, was a high-pressure one, of 160-
horse power, and put in motion a double screw. This gave the yacht such
swiftness that during her trial trip in the Firth of Clyde, she made seventeen
miles an hour, a higher speed than any vessel had yet attained. No alterations
were consequently needed in the DUNCAN herself; John Mangles had only to
attend to her interior arrangements.
His first care was to enlarge the bunkers to carry as much coal as possible,
for it is difficult to get fresh supplies en route. He had to do the same with the
store-rooms, and managed so well that he succeeded in laying in provisions
enough for two years. There was abundance of money at his command, and
enough remained to buy a cannon, on a pivot carriage, which he mounted on
the forecastle. There was no knowing what might happen, and it is always well
to be able to send a good round bullet flying four miles off.
John Mangles understood his business. Though he was only the captain of
a pleasure yacht, he was one of the best skippers in Glasgow. He was thirty
years of age, and his countenance expressed both courage and goodness, if the
features were somewhat coarse. He had been brought up at the castle by the
Glenarvan family, and had turned out a capital sailor, having already given
proof, in some of his long voyages, of his skill and energy and sang-froid.
When Lord Glenarvan offered him the command of the DUNCAN, he
accepted it with right good will, for he loved the master of Malcolm Castle,
like a brother, and had hitherto vainly sought some opportunity of showing his
devotion.
Tom Austin, the mate, was an old sailor, worthy of all confidence. The
crew, consisting of twenty-five men, including the captain and chief officer,
were all from Dumbartonshire, experienced sailors, and all belonging to the
Glenarvan estate; in fact, it was a regular clan, and they did not forget to carry
with them the traditional bagpipes. Lord Glenarvan had in them a band of
trusty fellows, skilled in their calling, devoted to himself, full of courage, and
as practiced in handling fire-arms as in the maneuvering of a ship; a valiant
little troop, ready to follow him any where, even in the most dangerous
expeditions. When the crew heard whither they were bound, they could not
restrain their enthusiasm, and the rocks of Dumbarton rang again with their
joyous outbursts of cheers.
But while John Mangles made the stowage and provisioning of the yacht
his chief business, he did not forget to fit up the rooms of Lord and Lady
Glenarvan for a long voyage. He had also to get cabins ready for the children
of Captain Grant, as Lady Helena could not refuse Mary’s request to
accompany her.
As for young Robert, he would have smuggled himself in somewhere in
the hold of the DUNCAN rather than be left behind. He would willingly have
gone as cabin-boy, like Nelson. It was impossible to resist a little fellow like
that, and, indeed, no one tried. He would not even go as a passenger, but must
serve in some capacity, as cabin-boy, apprentice or sailor, he did not care
which, so he was put in charge of John Mangles, to be properly trained for his
vocation.
“And I hope he won’t spare me the ‘cat-o-nine-tails’ if I don’t do
properly,” said Robert.
“Rest easy on that score, my boy,” said Lord Glenarvan, gravely; he did
not add, that this mode of punishment was forbidden on board the DUNCAN,
and moreover, was quite unnecessary.
To complete the roll of passengers, we must name Major McNabbs. The
Major was about fifty years of age, with a calm face and regular features—a
man who did whatever he was told, of an excellent, indeed, a perfect temper;
modest, silent, peaceable, and amiable, agreeing with everybody on every
subject, never discussing, never disputing, never getting angry. He wouldn’t
move a step quicker, or slower, whether he walked upstairs to bed or mounted
a breach. Nothing could excite him, nothing could disturb him, not even a
cannon ball, and no doubt he will die without ever having known even a
passing feeling of irritation.
This man was endowed in an eminent degree, not only with ordinary
animal courage, that physical bravery of the battle-field, which is solely due to
muscular energy, but he had what is far nobler—moral courage, firmness of
soul. If he had any fault it was his being so intensely Scotch from top to toe, a
Caledonian of the Caledonians, an obstinate stickler for all the ancient customs
of his country. This was the reason he would never serve in England, and he
gained his rank of Major in the 42nd regiment, the Highland Black Watch,
composed entirely of Scotch noblemen.
As a cousin of Glenarvan, he lived in Malcolm Castle, and as a major he
went as a matter of course with the DUNCAN.
Such, then, was the PERSONNEL of this yacht, so unexpectedly called to
make one of the most wonderful voyages of modern times. From the hour she
reached the steamboat quay at Glasgow, she completely monopolized the
public attention. A considerable crowd visited her every day, and the
DUNCAN was the one topic of interest and conversation, to the great vexation
of the different captains in the port, among others of Captain Burton, in
command of the SCOTIA, a magnificent steamer lying close beside her, and
bound for Calcutta. Considering her size, the SCOTIA might justly look upon
the DUNCAN as a mere fly-boat, and yet this pleasure yacht of Lord
Glenarvan was quite the center of attraction, and the excitement about her
daily increased.
The DUNCAN was to sail out with the tide at three o’clock on the morning
of the 25th of August. But before starting, a touching ceremony was witnessed
by the good people of Glasgow. At eight o’clock the night before, Lord
Glenarvan and his friends, and the entire crew, from the stokers to the captain,
all who were to take part in this self-sacrificing voyage, left the yacht and
repaired to St. Mungo’s, the ancient cathedral of the city. This venerable
edifice, so marvelously described by Walter Scott, remains intact amid the
ruins made by the Reformation; and it was there, beneath its lofty arches, in
the grand nave, in the presence of an immense crowd, and surrounded by
tombs as thickly set as in a cemetery, that they all assembled to implore the
blessing of Heaven on their expedition, and to put themselves under the
protection of Providence. The Rev. Mr. Morton conducted the service, and
when he had ended and pronounced the benediction, a young girl’s voice
broke the solemn silence that followed. It was Mary Grant who poured out her
heart to God in prayer for her benefactors, while grateful happy tears streamed
down her cheeks, and almost choked her utterance. The vast assembly
dispersed under the influence of deep emotion, and at ten o’clock the
passengers and crew returned on board the vessel.
CHAPTER VI AN UNEXPECTED PASSENGER
The ladies passed the whole of the first day of the voyage in their berths,
for there was a heavy swell in the sea, and toward evening the wind blew
pretty fresh, and the DUNCAN tossed and pitched considerably.
But the morning after, the wind changed, and the captain ordered the men
to put up the foresail, and brigantine and foretopsail, which greatly lessened
the rolling of the vessel. Lady Helena and Mary Grant were able to come on
deck at daybreak, where they found Lord Glenarvan, Major McNabbs and the
captain.
“And how do you stand the sea, Miss Mary?” said Lord Glenarvan.
“Pretty well, my Lord. I am not very much inconvenienced by it. Besides I
shall get used to it.”
“And our young Robert!”
“Oh, as for Robert,” said the captain, “whenever he is not poking about
down below in the engine-room, he is perched somewhere aloft among the
rigging. A youngster like that laughs at sea-sickness. Why, look at him this
very moment! Do you see him?”
The captain pointed toward the foremast, and sure enough there was
Robert, hanging on the yards of the topgallant mast, a hundred feet above in
the air. Mary involuntarily gave a start, but the captain said:
“Oh, don’t be afraid, Miss Mary; he is all right, take my word for it; I’ll
have a capital sailor to present to Captain Grant before long, for we’ll find the
worthy captain, depend upon it.”
“Heaven grant it, Mr. John,” replied the young girl.
“My dear child,” said Lord Glenarvan, “there is something so providential
in the whole affair, that we have every reason to hope. We are not going, we
are led; we are not searching, we are guided. And then see all the brave men
that have enlisted in the service of the good cause. We shall not only succeed
in our enterprise, but there will be little difficulty in it. I promised Lady
Helena a pleasure trip, and I am much mistaken if I don’t keep my word.”
“Edward,” said his wife, “you are the best of men.”
“Not at all,” was the reply; “but I have the best of crews and the best of
ships. You don’t admire the DUNCAN, I suppose, Miss Mary?”
“On the contrary, my lord, I do admire her, and I’m a connoisseur in
ships,” returned the young girl.
“Indeed!”
“Yes. I have played all my life on my father’s ships. He should have made
me a sailor, for I dare say, at a push, I could reef a sail or plait a gasket easily
enough.”
“Do you say so, miss?” exclaimed John Mangles.
“If you talk like that you and John will be great friends, for he can’t think
any calling is equal to that of a seaman; he can’t fancy any other, even for a
woman. Isn’t it true, John?”
“Quite so,” said the captain, “and yet, your Lordship, I must confess that
Miss Grant is more in her place on the poop than reefing a topsail. But for all
that, I am quite flattered by her remarks.”
“And especially when she admires the DUNCAN,” replied Glenarvan.
“Well, really,” said Lady Glenarvan, “you are so proud of your yacht that
you make me wish to look all over it; and I should like to go down and see
how our brave men are lodged.”
“Their quarters are first-rate,” replied John, “they are as comfortable as if
they were at home.”
“And they really are at home, my dear Helena,” said Lord Glenarvan.
“This yacht is a portion of our old Caledonia, a fragment of Dumbartonshire,
making a voyage by special favor, so that in a manner we are still in our own
country. The DUNCAN is Malcolm Castle, and the ocean is Loch Lomond.”
“Very well, dear Edward, do the honors of the Castle then.”
“At your service, madam; but let me tell Olbinett first.”
The steward of the yacht was an excellent maitre d’hotel, and might have
been French for his airs of importance, but for all that he discharged his
functions with zeal and intelligence.
“Olbinett,” said his master, as he appeared in answer to his summons, “we
are going to have a turn before breakfast. I hope we shall find it ready when
we come back.”
He said this just as if it had been a walk to Tarbert or Loch Katrine they
were going, and the steward bowed with perfect gravity in reply.
“Are you coming with us, Major?” asked Lady Helena.
“If you command me,” replied McNabbs.
“Oh!” said Lord Glenarvan; “the Major is absorbed in his cigar; you
mustn’t tear him from it. He is an inveterate smoker, Miss Mary, I can tell you.
He is always smoking, even while he sleeps.”
The Major gave an assenting nod, and Lord Glenarvan and his party went
below.
McNabbs remained alone, talking to himself, as was his habit, and was
soon enveloped in still thicker clouds of smoke. He stood motionless,
watching the track of the yacht. After some minutes of this silent
contemplation he turned round, and suddenly found himself face to face with a
new comer. Certainly, if any thing could have surprised him, this
RENCONTRE would, for he had never seen the stranger in his life before.
He was a tall, thin, withered-looking man, about forty years of age, and
resembled a long nail with a big head. His head was large and massive, his
forehead high, his chin very marked. His eyes were concealed by enormous
round spectacles, and in his look was that peculiar indecision which is
common to nyctalopes, or people who have a peculiar construction of the eye,
which makes the sight imperfect in the day and better at night. It was evident
from his physiognomy that he was a lively, intelligent man; he had not the
crabbed expression of those grave individuals who never laugh on principle,
and cover their emptiness with a mask of seriousness. He looked far from that.
His careless, good-humored air, and easy, unceremonious manners, showed
plainly that he knew how to take men and things on their bright side. But
though he had not yet opened his mouth, he gave one the impression of being
a great talker, and moreover, one of those absent folks who neither see though
they are looking, nor hear though they are listening. He wore a traveling cap,
and strong, low, yellow boots with leather gaiters. His pantaloons and jacket
were of brown velvet, and their innumerable pockets were stuffed with notebooks, memorandum-books, account-books, pocket-books, and a thousand
other things equally cumbersome and useless, not to mention a telescope in
addition, which he carried in a shoulder-belt.
The stranger’s excitement was a strong contrast to the Major’s placidity.
He walked round McNabbs, looking at him and questioning him with his eyes
without eliciting one remark from the imperturbable Scotchman, or awakening
his curiosity in the least, to know where he came from, and where he was
going, and how he had got on board the DUNCAN.
Finding all his efforts baffled by the Major’s indifference, the mysterious
passenger seized his telescope, drew it out to its fullest extent, about four feet,
and began gazing at the horizon, standing motionless with his legs wide apart.
His examination lasted some few minutes, and then he lowered the glass, set it
up on deck, and leaned on it as if it had been a walking-stick. Of course, his
weight shut up the instrument immediately by pushing the different parts one
into the other, and so suddenly, that he fell full length on deck, and lay
sprawling at the foot of the mainmast.
Any one else but the Major would have smiled, at least, at such a ludicrous
sight; but McNabbs never moved a muscle of his face.
This was too much for the stranger, and he called out, with an
unmistakably foreign accent:
“Steward!”
He waited a minute, but nobody appeared, and he called again, still louder,
“Steward!”
Mr. Olbinett chanced to be passing that minute on his way from the galley,
and what was his astonishment at hearing himself addressed like this by a
lanky individual of whom he had no knowledge whatever.
“Where can he have come from? Who is he?” he thought to himself. “He
can not possibly be one of Lord Glenarvan’s friends?”
However, he went up on the poop, and approached the unknown
personage, who accosted him with the inquiry, “Are you the steward of this
vessel?”
“Yes, sir,” replied Olbinett; “but I have not the honor of—”
“I am the passenger in cabin Number 6.”
“Number 6!” repeated the steward.
“Certainly; and your name, what is it?”
“Olbinett.”
“Well, Olbinett, my friend, we must think of breakfast, and that pretty
quickly. It is thirty-six hours since I have had anything to eat, or rather thirtysix hours that I have been asleep—pardonable enough in a man who came all
the way, without stopping, from Paris to Glasgow. What is the breakfast
hour?”
“Nine o’clock,” replied Olbinett, mechanically.
The stranger tried to pull out his watch to see the time; but it was not till he
had rummaged through the ninth pocket that he found it.
“Ah, well,” he said, “it is only eight o’clock at present. Fetch me a glass of
sherry and a biscuit while I am waiting, for I am actually falling through sheer
inanition.”
Olbinett heard him without understanding what he meant for the voluble
stranger kept on talking incessantly, flying from one subject to another.
“The captain? Isn’t the captain up yet? And the chief officer? What is he
doing? Is he asleep still? It is fine weather, fortunately, and the wind is
favorable, and the ship goes all alone.”
Just at that moment John Mangles appeared at the top of the stairs.
“Here is the captain!” said Olbinett.
“Ah! delighted, Captain Burton, delighted to make your acquaintance,”
exclaimed the unknown.
John Mangles stood stupefied, as much at seeing the stranger on board as
at hearing himself called “Captain Burton.”
But the new comer went on in the most affable manner.
“Allow me to shake hands with you, sir; and if I did not do so yesterday
evening, it was only because I did not wish to be troublesome when you were
starting. But to-day, captain, it gives me great pleasure to begin my intercourse
with you.”
John Mangles opened his eyes as wide as possible, and stood staring at
Olbinett and the stranger alternately.
But without waiting for a reply, the rattling fellow continued:
“Now the introduction is made, my dear captain, we are old friends. Let’s
have a little talk, and tell me how you like the SCOTIA?”
“What do you mean by the SCOTIA?” put in John Mangles at last.
“By the SCOTIA? Why, the ship we’re on, of course—a good ship that has
been commended to me, not only for its physical qualities, but also for the
moral qualities of its commander, the brave Captain Burton. You will be some
relation of the famous African traveler of that name. A daring man he was, sir.
I offer you my congratulations.”
“Sir,” interrupted John. “I am not only no relation of Burton the great
traveler, but I am not even Captain Burton.”
“Ah, is that so? It is Mr. Burdness, the chief officer, that I am talking to at
present.”
“Mr. Burdness!” repeated John Mangles, beginning to suspect how the
matter stood. Only he asked himself whether the man was mad, or some
heedless rattle pate? He was beginning to explain the case in a categorical
manner, when Lord Glenarvan and his party came up on the poop. The
stranger caught sight of them directly, and exclaimed:
“Ah! the passengers, the passengers! I hope you are going to introduce me
to them, Mr. Burdness!”
But he could not wait for any one’s intervention, and going up to them with
perfect ease and grace, said, bowing to Miss Grant, “Madame;” then to Lady
Helena, with another bow, “Miss;” and to Lord Glenarvan, “Sir.”
Here John Mangles interrupted him, and said, “Lord Glenarvan.”
“My Lord,” continued the unknown, “I beg pardon for presenting myself to
you, but at sea it is well to relax the strict rules of etiquette a little. I hope we
shall soon become acquainted with each other, and that the company of these
ladies will make our voyage in the SCOTIA appear as short as agreeable.”
Lady Helena and Miss Grant were too astonished to be able to utter a
single word. The presence of this intruder on the poop of the DUNCAN was
perfectly inexplicable.
Lord Glenarvan was more collected, and said, “Sir, to whom have I the
honor of speaking?”
“To Jacques Eliacin Francois Marie Paganel, Secretary of the Geographical
Society of Paris, Corresponding Member of the Societies of Berlin, Bombay,
Darmstadt, Leipsic, London, St. Petersburg, Vienna, and New York; Honorary
Member of the Royal Geographical and Ethnographical Institute of the East
Indies; who, after having spent twenty years of his life in geographical work in
the study, wishes to see active service, and is on his way to India to gain for
the science what information he can by following up the footsteps of great
travelers.”
CHAPTER VII JACQUES PAGANEL IS UNDECEIVED
The Secretary of the Geographical Society was evidently an amiable
personage, for all this was said in a most charming manner. Lord Glenarvan
knew quite well who he was now, for he had often heard Paganel spoken of,
and was aware of his merits. His geographical works, his papers on modern
discoveries, inserted in the reports of the Society, and his world-wide
correspondence, gave him a most distinguished place among the LITERATI of
France.
Lord Glenarvan could not but welcome such a guest, and shook hands
cordially.
“And now that our introductions are over,” he added, “you will allow me,
Monsieur Paganel, to ask you a question?”
“Twenty, my Lord,” replied Paganel; “it will always be a pleasure to
converse with you.”
“Was it last evening that you came on board this vessel?”
“Yes, my Lord, about 8 o’clock. I jumped into a cab at the Caledonian
Railway, and from the cab into the SCOTIA, where I had booked my cabin
before I left Paris. It was a dark night, and I saw no one on board, so I found
cabin No. 6, and went to my berth immediately, for I had heard that the best
way to prevent sea-sickness is to go to bed as soon as you start, and not to stir
for the first few days; and, moreover, I had been traveling for thirty hours. So I
tucked myself in, and slept conscientiously, I assure you, for thirty-six hours.”
Paganel’s listeners understood the whole mystery, now, of his presence on
the DUNCAN. The French traveler had mistaken his vessel, and gone on
board while the crew were attending the service at St. Mungo’s. All was
explained. But what would the learned geographer say, when he heard the
name and destination of the ship, in which he had taken passage?
“Then it is Calcutta, M. Paganel, that you have chosen as your point of
departure on your travels?”
“Yes, my Lord, to see India has been a cherished purpose with me all my
life. It will be the realization of my fondest dreams, to find myself in the
country of elephants and Thugs.”
“Then it would be by no means a matter of indifference to you, to visit
another country instead.”
“No, my Lord; indeed it would be very disagreeable, for I have letters from
Lord Somerset, the Governor-General, and also a commission to execute for
the Geographical Society.”
“Ah, you have a commission.”
“Yes, I have to attempt a curious and important journey, the plan of which
has been drawn up by my learned friend and colleague, M. Vivien de Saint
Martin. I am to pursue the track of the Schlaginweit Brothers; and Colonels
Waugh and Webb, and Hodgson; and Huc and Gabet, the missionaries; and
Moorecroft and M. Jules Remy, and so many celebrated travelers. I mean to
try and succeed where Krick, the missionary so unfortunately failed in 1846;
in a word, I want to follow the course of the river Yarou-Dzangbo-Tchou,
which waters Thibet for a distance of 1500 kilometres, flowing along the
northern base of the Himalayas, and to find out at last whether this river does
not join itself to the Brahmapoutre in the northeast of As-sam. The gold
medal, my Lord, is promised to the traveler who will succeed in ascertaining a
fact which is one of the greatest DESIDERATA to the geography of India.”
Paganel was magnificent. He spoke with superb animation, soaring away
on the wings of imagination. It would have been as impossible to stop him as
to stop the Rhine at the Falls of Schaffhausen.
“Monsieur Jacques Paganel,” said Lord Glenarvan, after a brief pause,
“that would certainly be a grand achievement, and you would confer a great
boon on science, but I should not like to allow you to be laboring under a
mistake any longer, and I must tell you, therefore, that for the present at least,
you must give up the pleasure of a visit to India.”
“Give it up. And why?”
“Because you are turning your back on the Indian peninsula.”
“What! Captain Burton.”
“I am not Captain Burton,” said John Mangles.
“But the SCOTIA.”
“This vessel is not the SCOTIA.”
It would be impossible to depict the astonishment of Paganel. He stared
first at one and then at another in the utmost bewilderment.
Lord Glenarvan was perfectly grave, and Lady Helena and Mary showed
their sympathy for his vexation by their looks. As for John Mangles, he could
not suppress a smile; but the Major appeared as unconcerned as usual. At last
the poor fellow shrugged his shoulders, pushed down his spectacles over his
nose and said:
“You are joking.”
But just at that very moment his eye fell on the wheel of the ship, and
he saw the two words on it: Duncan.
Glasgow.
“The DUNCAN! the DUNCAN!” he exclaimed, with a cry of despair, and
forthwith rushed down the stairs, and away to his cabin.
As soon as the unfortunate SAVANT had disappeared, every one, except
the Major, broke out into such peals of laughter that the sound reached the ears
of the sailors in the forecastle. To mistake a railway or to take the train to
Edinburgh when you want to go to Dumbarton might happen; but to mistake a
ship and be sailing for Chili when you meant to go to India—that is a blunder
indeed!
“However,” said Lord Glenarvan, “I am not much astonished at it in
Paganel. He is quite famous for such misadventures. One day he published a
celebrated map of America, and put Japan in it! But for all that, he is
distinguished for his learning, and he is one of the best geographers in
France.”
“But what shall we do with the poor gentleman?” said Lady Helena; “we
can’t take him with us to Patagonia.”
“Why not?” replied McNabbs, gravely. “We are not responsible for his
heedless mistakes. Suppose he were in a railway train, would they stop it for
him?”
“No, but he would get out at the first station.”
“Well, that is just what he can do here, too, if he likes; he can disembark at
the first place where we touch.”
While they were talking, Paganel came up again on the poop, looking very
woebegone and crestfallen. He had been making inquiry about his luggage, to
assure himself that it was all on board, and kept repeating incessantly the
unlucky words, “The DUNCAN! the DUNCAN!”
He could find no others in his vocabulary. He paced restlessly up and
down; sometimes stopping to examine the sails, or gaze inquiringly over the
wide ocean, at the far horizon. At length he accosted Lord Glenarvan once
more, and said—
“And this DUNCAN—where is she going?”
“To America, Monsieur Paganel,” was the reply.
“And to what particular part?”
“To Concepcion.”
“To Chili! to Chili!” cried the unfortunate geographer. “And my mission to
India. But what will M. de Quatre-fages, the President of the Central
Commission, say? And M. d’ Avezac? And M. Cortanbert? And M. Vivien de
Saint Martin? How shall I show my face at the SEANCES of the Society?”
“Come, Monsieur Paganel, don’t despair. It can all be managed; you will
only have to put up with a little delay, which is relatively of not much
importance. The Yarou-Dzangbo-Tchou will wait for you still in the mountains
of Thibet. We shall soon put in at Madeira, and you will get a ship there to
take you back to Europe.”
“Thanks, my Lord. I suppose I must resign myself to it; but people will say
it is a most extraordinary adventure, and it is only to me such things happen.
And then, too, there is a cabin taken for me on board the SCOTIA.”
“Oh, as to the SCOTIA, you’ll have to give that up meantime.”
“But the DUNCAN is a pleasure yacht, is it not?” began Paganel again,
after a fresh examination of the vessel.
“Yes, sir,” said John Mangles, “and belongs to Lord Glenarvan.”
“Who begs you will draw freely on his hospitality,” said Lord Glenarvan.
“A thousand thanks, my Lord! I deeply feel your courtesy, but allow me to
make one observation: India is a fine country, and can offer many a surprising
marvel to travelers. These ladies, I suppose, have never seen it. Well now, the
man at the helm has only to give a turn at the wheel, and the DUNCAN will
sail as easily to Calcutta as to Concepcion; and since it is only a pleasure trip
that you are—”
His proposal was met by such grave, disapproving shakes of the head, that
he stopped short before the sentence was completed; and Lady Helena said:
“Monsieur Paganel, if we were only on a pleasure trip, I should reply, ‘Let
us all go to India together,’ and I am sure Lord Glenarvan would not object;
but the DUNCAN is going to bring back shipwrecked mariners who were cast
away on the shores of Patagonia, and we could not alter such a destination.”
The Frenchman was soon put in possession of all the circumstances of the
case. He was no unmoved auditor, and when he heard of Lady Helena’s
generous proposition, he could not help saying,
“Madame, permit me to express my admiration of your conduct throughout
—my unreserved admiration. Let your yacht continue her course. I should
reproach myself were I to cause a single day’s delay.”
“Will you join us in our search, then?” asked Lady Helena.
“It is impossible, madame. I must fulfill my mission. I shall disembark at
the first place you touch at, wherever it may be.”
“That will be Madeira,” said John Mangles.
“Madeira be it then. I shall only be 180 leagues from Lisbon, and I shall
wait there for some means of transport.”
“Very well, Monsieur Paganel, it shall be as you wish; and, for my own
part, I am very glad to be able to offer you, meantime, a few days’ hospitality.
I only hope you will not find our company too dull.”
“Oh, my Lord,” exclaimed Paganel, “I am but too happy to have made a
mistake which has turned out so agreeably. Still, it is a very ridiculous plight
for a man to be in, to find himself sailing to America when he set out to go to
the East Indies!”
But in spite of this melancholy reflection, the Frenchman submitted
gracefully to the compulsory delay. He made himself amiable and merry, and
even diverting, and enchanted the ladies with his good humor. Before the end
of the day he was friends with everybody. At his request, the famous
document was brought out. He studied it carefully and minutely for a long
time, and finally declared his opinion that no other interpretation of it was
possible. Mary Grant and her brother inspired him with the most lively
interest. He gave them great hope; indeed, the young girl could not help
smiling at his sanguine prediction of success, and this odd way of foreseeing
future events. But for his mission he would have made one of the search party
for Captain Grant, undoubtedly.
As for Lady Helena, when he heard that she was a daughter of William
Tuffnell, there was a perfect explosion of admiring epithets. He had known her
father, and what letters had passed between them when William Tuffnell was a
corresponding member of the Society! It was he himself that had introduced
him and M. Malte Brun. What a rencontre this was, and what a pleasure to
travel with the daughter of Tuffnell.
He wound up by asking permission to kiss her, which Lady Helena
granted, though it was, perhaps, a little improper.
CHAPTER VIII THE GEOGRAPHER’S RESOLUTION
Meantime the yacht, favored by the currents from the north of Africa, was
making rapid progress toward the equator. On the 30th of August they sighted
the Madeira group of islands, and Glenarvan, true to his promise, offered to
put in there, and land his new guest.
But Paganel said:
“My dear Lord, I won’t stand on ceremony with you. Tell me, did you
intend to stop at Madeira before I came on board?”
“No,” replied Glenarvan.
“Well, then, allow me to profit by my unlucky mistake. Madeira is an
island too well known to be of much interest now to a geographer. Every thing
about this group has been said and written already. Besides, it is completely
going down as far as wine growing is concerned. Just imagine no vines to
speak of being in Madeira! In 1813, 22,000 pipes of wine were made there,
and in 1845 the number fell to 2,669. It is a grievous spectacle! If it is all the
same to you, we might go on to the Canary Isles instead.”
“Certainly. It will not the least interfere with our route.”
“I know it will not, my dear Lord. In the Canary Islands, you see, there are
three groups to study, besides the Peak of Teneriffe, which I always wished to
visit. This is an opportunity, and I should like to avail myself of it, and make
the ascent of the famous mountain while I am waiting for a ship to take me
back to Europe.”
“As you please, my dear Paganel,” said Lord Glenarvan, though he could
not help smiling; and no wonder, for these islands are scarcely 250 miles from
Madeira, a trifling distance for such a quick sailer as the DUNCAN.
Next day, about 2 P. M., John Mangles and Paganel were walking on the
poop. The Frenchman was assailing his companion with all sorts of questions
about Chili, when all at once the captain interrupted him, and pointing toward
the southern horizon, said:
“Monsieur Paganel?”
“Yes, my dear Captain.”
“Be so good as to look in this direction. Don’t you see anything?”
“Nothing.”
“You’re not looking in the right place. It is not on the horizon, but above it
in the clouds.”
“In the clouds? I might well not see.”
“There, there, by the upper end of the bowsprit.”
“I see nothing.”
“Then you don’t want to see. Anyway, though we are forty miles off, yet I
tell you the Peak of Teneriffe is quite visible yonder above the horizon.”
But whether Paganel could not or would not see it then, two hours later he
was forced to yield to ocular evidence or own himself blind.
“You do see it at last, then,” said John Mangles.
“Yes, yes, distinctly,” replied Paganel, adding in a disdainful tone, “and
that’s what they call the Peak of Teneriffe!”
“That’s the Peak.”
“It doesn’t look much of a height.”
“It is 11,000 feet, though, above the level of the sea.”
“That is not equal to Mont Blanc.”
“Likely enough, but when you come to ascend it, probably you’ll think it
high enough.”
“Oh, ascend it! ascend it, my dear captain! What would be the good after
Humboldt and Bonplan? That Humboldt was a great genius. He made the
ascent of this mountain, and has given a description of it which leaves nothing
unsaid. He tells us that it comprises five different zones—the zone of the
vines, the zone of the laurels, the zone of the pines, the zone of the Alpine
heaths, and, lastly, the zone of sterility. He set his foot on the very summit, and
found that there was not even room enough to sit down. The view from the
summit was very extensive, stretching over an area equal to Spain. Then he
went right down into the volcano, and examined the extinct crater. What could
I do, I should like you to tell me, after that great man?”
“Well, certainly, there isn’t much left to glean. That is vexing, too, for you
would find it dull work waiting for a vessel in the Peak of Teneriffe.”
“But, I say, Mangles, my dear fellow, are there no ports in the Cape Verde
Islands that we might touch at?”
“Oh, yes, nothing would be easier than putting you off at Villa Praya.”
“And then I should have one advantage, which is by no means
inconsiderable—I should find fellow-countrymen at Senegal, and that is not
far away from those islands. I am quite aware that the group is said to be
devoid of much interest, and wild, and unhealthy; but everything is curious in
the eyes of a geographer. Seeing is a science. There are people who do not
know how to use their eyes, and who travel about with as much intelligence as
a shell-fish. But that’s not in my line, I assure you.”
“Please yourself, Monsieur Paganel. I have no doubt geographical science
will be a gainer by your sojourn in the Cape Verde Islands. We must go in
there anyhow for coal, so your disembarkation will not occasion the least
delay.”
The captain gave immediate orders for the yacht to continue her route,
steering to the west of the Canary group, and leaving Teneriffe on her
larboard. She made rapid progress, and passed the Tropic of Cancer on the
second of September at 5 A. M.
The weather now began to change, and the atmosphere became damp and
heavy. It was the rainy season, “le tempo das aguas,” as the Spanish call it, a
trying season to travelers, but useful to the inhabitants of the African Islands,
who lack trees and consequently water. The rough weather prevented the
passengers from going on deck, but did not make the conversation any less
animated in the saloon.
On the 3d of September Paganel began to collect his luggage to go on
shore. The DUNCAN was already steaming among the Islands. She passed
Sal, a complete tomb of sand lying barren and desolate, and went on among
the vast coral reefs and athwart the Isle of St. Jacques, with its long chain of
basaltic mountains, till she entered the port of Villa Praya and anchored in
eight fathoms of water before the town. The weather was frightful, and the
surf excessively violent, though the bay was sheltered from the sea winds. The
rain fell in such torrents that the town was scarcely visible through it. It rose
on a plain in the form of a terrace, buttressed on volcanic rocks three hundred
feet high. The appearance of the island through the thick veil of rain was
mournful in the extreme.
Lady Helena could not go on shore as she had purposed; indeed, even
coaling was a difficult business, and the passengers had to content themselves
below the poop as best they might. Naturally enough, the main topic of
conversation was the weather. Everybody had something to say about it except
the Major, who surveyed the universal deluge with the utmost indifference.
Paganel walked up and down shaking his head.
“It is clear enough, Paganel,” said Lord Glenarvan, “that the elements are
against you.”
“I’ll be even with them for all that,” replied the Frenchman.
“You could not face rain like that, Monsieur Paganel,” said Lady Helena.
“Oh, quite well, madam, as far as I myself am concerned. It is for my
luggage and instruments that I am afraid. Everything will be ruined.”
“The disembarking is the worst part of the business. Once at Villa Praya
you might manage to find pretty good quarters. They wouldn’t be over clean,
and you might find the monkeys and pigs not always the most agreeable
companions. But travelers are not too particular, and, moreover, in seven or
eight months you would get a ship, I dare say, to take you back to Europe.”
“Seven or eight months!” exclaimed Paganel.
“At least. The Cape Verde Islands are not much frequented by ships during
the rainy season. But you can employ your time usefully. This archipelago is
still but little known.”
“You can go up the large rivers,” suggested Lady Helena.
“There are none, madam.”
“Well, then, the small ones.”
“There are none, madam.”
“The running brooks, then.”
“There are no brooks, either.”
“You can console yourself with the forests if that’s the case,” put in the
Major.
“You can’t make forests without trees, and there are no trees.”
“A charming country!” said the Major.
“Comfort yourself, my dear Paganel, you’ll have the mountains at any
rate,” said Glenarvan.
“Oh, they are neither lofty nor interesting, my Lord, and, beside, they have
been described already.”
“Already!” said Lord Glenarvan.
“Yes, that is always my luck. At the Canary Islands, I saw myself
anticipated by Humboldt, and here by M. Charles Sainte-Claire Deville, a
geologist.”
“Impossible!”
“It is too true,” replied Paganel, in a doleful voice. “Monsieur Deville was
on board the government corvette, La Decidee, when she touched at the Cape
Verde Islands, and he explored the most interesting of the group, and went to
the top of the volcano in Isle Fogo. What is left for me to do after him?”
“It is really a great pity,” said Helena. “What will become of you,
Monsieur Paganel?”
Paganel remained silent.
“You would certainly have done much better to have landed at Madeira,
even though there had been no wine,” said Glenarvan.
Still the learned secretary was silent.
“I should wait,” said the Major, just as if he had said, “I should not wait.”
Paganel spoke again at length, and said:
“My dear Glenarvan, where do you mean to touch next?”
“At Concepcion.”
“Plague it! That is a long way out of the road to India.”
“Not it! From the moment you pass Cape Horn, you are getting nearer to
it.”
“I doubt it much.”
“Beside,” resumed Lord Glenarvan, with perfect gravity, “when people are
going to the Indies it doesn’t matter much whether it is to the East or West.”
“What! it does not matter much?”
“Without taking into account the fact that the inhabitants of the Pampas in
Patagonia are as much Indians as the natives of the Punjaub.”
“Well done, my Lord. That’s a reason that would never have entered my
head!”
“And then, my dear Paganel, you can gain the gold medal anyway. There is
as much to be done, and sought, and investigated, and discovered in the
Cordilleras as in the mountains of Thibet.”
“But the course of the Yarou-Dzangbo-Tchou—what about that?”
“Go up the Rio Colorado instead. It is a river but little known, and its
course on the map is marked out too much according to the fancy of
geographers.”
“I know it is, my dear Lord; they have made grave mistakes. Oh, I make no
question that the Geographical Society would have sent me to Patagonia as
soon as to India, if I had sent in a request to that effect. But I never thought of
it.”
“Just like you.”
“Come, Monsieur Paganel, will you go with us?” asked Lady Helena, in
her most winning tone.
“Madam, my mission?”
“We shall pass through the Straits of Magellan, I must tell you,” said Lord
Glenarvan.
“My Lord, you are a tempter.”
“Let me add, that we shall visit Port Famine.”
“Port Famine!” exclaimed the Frenchman, besieged on all sides. “That
famous port in French annals!”
“Think, too, Monsieur Paganel, that by taking part in our enterprise, you
will be linking France with Scotland.”
“Undoubtedly.”
“A geographer would be of much use to our expedition, and what can be
nobler than to bring science to the service of humanity?”
“That’s well said, madam.”
“Take my advice, then, and yield to chance, or rather providence. Follow
our example. It was providence that sent us the document, and we set out in
consequence. The same providence brought you on board the DUNCAN.
Don’t leave her.”
“Shall I say yes, my good friends? Come, now, tell me, you want me very
much to stay, don’t you?” said Paganel.
“And you’re dying to stay, now, aren’t you, Paganel?” returned Glenarvan.
“That’s about it,” confessed the learned geographer; “but I was afraid it
would be inconsiderate.”
CHAPTER IX THROUGH THE STRAITS OF MAGELLAN
The joy on board was universal when Paganel’s resolution was made
known.
Little Robert flung himself on his neck in such tumultuous delight that he
nearly threw the worthy secretary down, and made him say, “Rude petit
bonhomme. I’ll teach him geography.”
Robert bade fair to be an accomplished gentleman some day, for John
Mangles was to make a sailor of him, and the Major was to teach him sangfroid, and Glenarvan and Lady Helena were to instil into him courage and
goodness and generosity, while Mary was to inspire him with gratitude toward
such instructors.
The DUNCAN soon finished taking in coal, and turned her back on the
dismal region. She fell in before long with the current from the coast of Brazil,
and on the 7th of September entered the Southern hemisphere.
So far, then, the voyage had been made without difficulty. Everybody was
full of hope, for in this search for Captain Grant, each day seemed to increase
the probability of finding him. The captain was among the most confident on
board, but his confidence mainly arose from the longing desire he had to see
Miss Mary happy. He was smitten with quite a peculiar interest for this young
girl, and managed to conceal his sentiments so well that everyone on board
saw it except himself and Mary Grant.
As for the learned geographer, he was probably the happiest man in all the
southern hemisphere. He spent the whole day in studying maps, which were
spread out on the saloon table, to the great annoyance of M. Olbinett, who
could never get the cloth laid for meals, without disputes on the subject. But
all the passengers took his part except the Major, who was perfectly indifferent
about geographical questions, especially at dinner-time. Paganel also came
across a regular cargo of old books in the chief officer’s chest. They were in a
very damaged condition, but among them he raked out a few Spanish volumes,
and determined forthwith to set to work to master the language of Cervantes,
as no one on board understood it, and it would be helpful in their search along
the Chilian coast. Thanks to his taste for languages, he did not despair of being
able to speak the language fluently when they arrived at Concepcion. He
studied it furiously, and kept constantly muttering heterogeneous syllables.
He spent his leisure hours in teaching young Robert, and instructed him in
the history of the country they were so rapidly approaching.
On the 25th of September, the yacht arrived off the Straits of Magellan,
and entered them without delay. This route is generally preferred by steamers
on their way to the Pacific Ocean. The exact length of the straits is 372 miles.
Ships of the largest tonnage find, throughout, sufficient depth of water, even
close to the shore, and there is a good bottom everywhere, and abundance of
fresh water, and rivers abounding in fish, and forests in game, and plenty of
safe and accessible harbors; in fact a thousand things which are lacking in
Strait Lemaire and Cape Horn, with its terrible rocks, incessantly visited by
hurricane and tempest.
For the first three or four hours—that is to say, for about sixty to eighty
miles, as far as Cape Gregory—the coast on either side was low and sandy.
Jacques Paganel would not lose a single point of view, nor a single detail of
the straits. It would scarcely take thirty-six hours to go through them, and the
moving panorama on both sides, seen in all the clearness and glory of the light
of a southern sun, was well worth the trouble of looking at and admiring. On
the Terra del Fuego side, a few wretched-looking creatures were wandering
about on the rocks, but on the other side not a solitary inhabitant was visible.
Paganel was so vexed at not being able to catch a glimpse of any
Patagonians, that his companions were quite amused at him. He would insist
that Patagonia without Patagonians was not Patagonia at all.
But Glenarvan replied:
“Patience, my worthy geographer. We shall see the Patagonians yet.”
“I am not sure of it.”
“But there is such a people, anyhow,” said Lady Helena.
“I doubt it much, madam, since I don’t see them.”
“But surely the very name Patagonia, which means ‘great feet’ in Spanish,
would not have been given to imaginary beings.” “Oh, the name is nothing,”
said Paganel, who was arguing simply for the sake of arguing. “And besides,
to speak the truth, we are not sure if that is their name.”
“What an idea!” exclaimed Glenarvan. “Did you know that, Major?”
“No,” replied McNabbs, “and wouldn’t give a Scotch pound-note for the
information.”
“You shall hear it, however, Major Indifferent. Though Magellan called the
natives Patagonians, the Fuegians called them Tiremenen, the Chilians
Caucalhues, the colonists of Carmen Tehuelches, the Araucans Huiliches;
Bougainville gives them the name of Chauha, and Falkner that of Tehuelhets.
The name they give themselves is Inaken. Now, tell me then, how would you
recognize them? Indeed, is it likely that a people with so many names has any
actual existence?”
“That’s a queer argument, certainly,” said Lady Helena.
“Well, let us admit it,” said her husband, “but our friend Paganel must own
that even if there are doubts about the name of the race there is none about
their size.”
“Indeed, I will never own anything so outrageous as that,” replied Paganel.
“They are tall,” said Glenarvan.
“I don’t know that.”
“Are they little, then?” asked Lady Helena.
“No one can affirm that they are.”
“About the average, then?” said McNabbs.
“I don’t know that either.”
“That’s going a little too far,” said Glenarvan. “Travelers who have seen
them tell us.”
“Travelers who have seen them,” interrupted Paganel, “don’t agree at all in
their accounts. Magellan said that his head scarcely reached to their waist.”
“Well, then, that proves.”
“Yes, but Drake declares that the English are taller than the tallest
Patagonian?”
“Oh, the English—that may be,” replied the Major, disdainfully, “but we
are talking of the Scotch.”
“Cavendish assures us that they are tall and robust,” continued Paganel.
“Hawkins makes out they are giants. Lemaire and Shouten declare that they
are eleven feet high.”
“These are all credible witnesses,” said Glenarvan.
“Yes, quite as much as Wood, Narborough, and Falkner, who say they are
of medium stature. Again, Byron, Giraudais, Bougainville, Wallis, and
Carteret, declared that the Patagonians are six feet six inches tall.”
“But what is the truth, then, among all these contradictions?” asked Lady
Helena.
“Just this, madame; the Patagonians have short legs, and a large bust; or by
way of a joke we might say that these natives are six feet high when they are
sitting, and only five when they are standing.”
“Bravo! my dear geographer,” said Glenarvan. “That is very well put.”
“Unless the race has no existence, that would reconcile all statements,”
returned Paganel. “But here is one consolation, at all events: the Straits of
Magellan are very magnificent, even without Patagonians.”
Just at this moment the DUNCAN was rounding the peninsula of
Brunswick between splendid panoramas.
Seventy miles after doubling Cape Gregory, she left on her starboard the
penitentiary of Punta Arena. The church steeple and the Chilian flag gleamed
for an instant among the trees, and then the strait wound on between huge
granitic masses which had an imposing effect. Cloud-capped mountains
appeared, their heads white with eternal snows, and their feet hid in immense
forests. Toward the southwest, Mount Tarn rose 6,500 feet high. Night came
on after a long lingering twilight, the light insensibly melting away into soft
shades. These brilliant constellations began to bestud the sky, and the Southern
Cross shone out. There were numerous bays along the shore, easy of access,
but the yacht did not drop anchor in any; she continued her course fearlessly
through the luminous darkness. Presently ruins came in sight, crumbling
buildings, which the night invested with grandeur, the sad remains of a
deserted settlement, whose name will be an eternal protest against these fertile
shores and forests full of game. The DUNCAN was passing Fort Famine.
It was in that very spot that Sarmiento, a Spaniard, came in 1581, with four
hundred emigrants, to establish a colony. He founded the city of St. Philip, but
the extreme severity of winter decimated the inhabitants, and those who had
struggled through the cold died subsequently of starvation. Cavendish the
Corsair discovered the last survivor dying of hunger in the ruins.
After sailing along these deserted shores, the DUNCAN went through a
series of narrow passes, between forests of beech and ash and birch, and at
length doubled Cape Froward, still bristling with the ice of the last winter. On
the other side of the strait, in Terra del Fuego, stood Mount Sarmiento,
towering to a height of 6,000 feet, an enormous accumulation of rocks,
separated by bands of cloud, forming a sort of aerial archipelago in the sky.
It is at Cape Froward that the American continent actually terminates, for
Cape Horn is nothing but a rock sunk in the sea in latitude 52 degrees. At
Cape Momax the straits widened, and she was able to get round Narborough
Isles and advance in a more southerly direction, till at length the rock of Cape
Pilares, the extreme point of Desolation Island, came in sight, thirty-six hours
after entering the straits. Before her stem lay a broad, open, sparkling ocean,
which Jacques Paganel greeted with enthusiastic gestures, feeling kindred
emotions with those which stirred the bosom of Ferdinand de Magellan
himself, when the sails of his ship, the TRINIDAD, first bent before the breeze
from the great Pacific.
CHAPTER X THE COURSE DECIDED
A week after they had doubled the Cape Pilares, the DUNCAN steamed
into the bay of Talcahuano, a magnificent estuary, twelve miles long and nine
broad. The weather was splendid. From November to March the sky is always
cloudless, and a constant south wind prevails, as the coast is sheltered by the
mountain range of the Andes. In obedience to Lord Glenarvan’s order, John
Mangles had sailed as near the archipelago of Chiloe as possible, and
examined all the creeks and windings of the coast, hoping to discover some
traces of the shipwreck. A broken spar, or any fragment of the vessel, would
have put them in the right track; but nothing whatever was visible, and the
yacht continued her route, till she dropped anchor at the port of Talcahuano,
forty-two days from the time she had sailed out of the fogs of the Clyde.
Glenarvan had a boat lowered immediately, and went on shore,
accompanied by Paganel. The learned geographer gladly availed himself of
the opportunity of making use of the language he had been studying so
conscientiously, but to his great amazement, found he could not make himself
understood by the people. “It is the accent I’ve not got,” he said.
“Let us go to the Custom-house,” replied Glenarvan.
They were informed on arriving there, by means of a few English words,
aided by expressive gestures, that the British Consul lived at Concepcion, an
hour’s ride distant. Glenarvan found no difficulty in procuring two fleet
horses, and he and Paganel were soon within the walls of the great city, due to
the enterprising genius of Valdivia, the valiant comrade of the Pizarros.
How it was shorn of its ancient splendor! Often pillaged by the natives,
burned in 1819, it lay in desolation and ruins, its walls still blackened by the
flames, scarcely numbering 8,000 inhabitants, and already eclipsed by
Talcahuano. The grass was growing in the streets, beneath the lazy feet of the
citizens, and all trade and business, indeed any description of activity, was
impossible. The notes of the mandolin resounded from every balcony, and
languishing songs floated on the breeze. Concepcion, the ancient city of brave
men, had become a village of women and children. Lord Glenarvan felt no
great desire to inquire into the causes of this decay, though Paganel tried to
draw him into a discussion on the subject. He would not delay an instant, but
went straight on to the house of Mr. Bentic, her Majesty’s Consul, who
received them very courteously, and, on learning their errand, undertook to
make inquiries all along the coast.
But to the question whether a three-mast vessel, called the BRITANNIA,
had gone ashore either on the Chilian or Araucanian coast, he gave a decided
negative. No report of such an event had been made to him, or any of the other
consuls. Glenarvan, however, would not allow himself to be disheartened; he
went back to Talcahuano, and spared neither pains nor expense to make a
thorough investigation of the whole seaboard. But it was all in vain. The most
minute inquiries were fruitless, and Lord Glenarvan returned to the yacht to
report his ill success. Mary Grant and her brother could not restrain their grief.
Lady Helena did her best to comfort them by loving caresses, while Jacques
Paganel took up the document and began studying it again. He had been
poring over it for more than an hour when Glenarvan interrupted him and said:
“Paganel! I appeal to your sagacity. Have we made an erroneous
interpretation of the document? Is there anything illogical about the meaning?”
Paganel was silent, absorbed in reflection.
“Have we mistaken the place where the catastrophe occurred?” continued
Glenarvan. “Does not the name Patagonia seem apparent even to the least
clear-sighted individual?”
Paganel was still silent.
“Besides,” said Glenarvan, “does not the word INDIEN prove we are
right?”
“Perfectly so,” replied McNabbs.
“And is it not evident, then, that at the moment of writing the words, the
shipwrecked men were expecting to be made prisoners by the Indians?”
“I take exception to that, my Lord,” said Paganel; “and even if your other
conclusions are right, this, at least, seemed to me irrational.”
“What do you mean?” asked Lady Helena, while all eyes were fixed on the
geographer.
“I mean this,” replied Paganel, “that Captain Grant is now a prisoner
among the Indians, and I further add that the document states it unmistakably.”
“Explain yourself, sir,” said Mary Grant.
“Nothing is plainer, dear Mary. Instead of reading the document seront
prisonniers, read sont prisonniers, and the whole thing is clear.”
“But that is impossible,” replied Lord Glenarvan.
“Impossible! and why, my noble friend?” asked Paganel, smiling.
“Because the bottle could only have been thrown into the sea just when the
vessel went to pieces on the rocks, and consequently the latitude and longitude
given refer to the actual place of the shipwreck.”
“There is no proof of that,” replied Paganel, “and I see nothing to preclude
the supposition that the poor fellows were dragged into the interior by the
Indians, and sought to make known the place of their captivity by means of
this bottle.”
“Except this fact, my dear Paganel, that there was no sea, and therefore
they could not have flung the bottle into it.”
“Unless they flung it into rivers which ran into the sea,” returned Paganel.
This reply was so unexpected, and yet so admissible, that it made them all
completely silent for a minute, though their beaming eyes betrayed the
rekindling of hope in their hearts. Lady Helena was the first to speak.
“What an idea!” she exclaimed.
“And what a good idea,” was Paganel’s naive rejoinder to her exclamation.
“What would you advise, then?” said Glenarvan.
“My advice is to follow the 37th parallel from the point where it touches
the American continent to where it dips into the Atlantic, without deviating
from it half a degree, and possibly in some part of its course we shall fall in
with the shipwrecked party.”
“There is a poor chance of that,” said the Major.
“Poor as it is,” returned Paganel, “we ought not to lose it. If I am right in
my conjecture, that the bottle has been carried into the sea on the bosom of
some river, we cannot fail to find the track of the prisoners. You can easily
convince yourselves of this by looking at this map of the country.”
He unrolled a map of Chili and the Argentine provinces as he spoke, and
spread it out on the table.
“Just follow me for a moment,” he said, “across the American continent.
Let us make a stride across the narrow strip of Chili, and over the Cordilleras
of the Andes, and get into the heart of the Pampas. Shall we find any lack of
rivers and streams and currents? No, for here are the Rio Negro and Rio
Colorado, and their tributaries intersected by the 37th parallel, and any of them
might have carried the bottle on its waters. Then, perhaps, in the midst of a
tribe in some Indian settlement on the shores of these almost unknown rivers,
those whom I may call my friends await some providential intervention. Ought
we to disappoint their hopes? Do you not all agree with me that it is our duty
to go along the line my finger is pointing out at this moment on the map, and if
after all we find I have been mistaken, still to keep straight on and follow the
37th parallel till we find those we seek, if even we go right round the world?”
His generous enthusiasm so touched his auditors that, involuntarily, they
rose to their feet and grasped his hands, while Robert exclaimed as he
devoured the map with his eyes:
“Yes, my father is there!”
“And where he is,” replied Glenarvan, “we’ll manage to go, my boy, and
find him. Nothing can be more logical than Paganel’s theory, and we must
follow the course he points out without the least hesitation. Captain Grant may
have fallen into the hands of a numerous tribe, or his captors may be but a
handful. In the latter case we shall carry him off at once, but in the event of the
former, after we have reconnoitered the situation, we must go back to the
DUNCAN on the eastern coast and get to Buenos Ayres, where we can soon
organize a detachment of men, with Major McNabbs at their head, strong
enough to tackle all the Indians in the Argentine provinces.”
“That’s capital, my Lord,” said John Mangles, “and I may add, that there is
no danger whatever crossing the continent.”
“Monsieur Paganel,” asked Lady Helena, “you have no fear then that if the
poor fellows have fallen into the hands of the Indians their lives at least have
been spared.”
“What a question? Why, madam, the Indians are not anthropophagi! Far
from it. One of my own countrymen, M. Guinnard, associated with me in the
Geographical Society, was three years a prisoner among the Indians in the
Pampas. He had to endure sufferings and ill-treatment, but came off victorious
at last. A European is a useful being in these countries. The Indians know his
value, and take care of him as if he were some costly animal.”
“There is not the least room then for hesitation,” said Lord Glenarvan. “Go
we must, and as soon as possible. What route must we take?”
“One that is both easy and agreeable,” replied Paganel. “Rather
mountainous at first, and then sloping gently down the eastern side of the
Andes into a smooth plain, turfed and graveled quite like a garden.”
“Let us see the map?” said the Major.
“Here it is, my dear McNabbs. We shall go through the capital of
Araucania, and cut the Cordilleras by the pass of Antuco, leaving the volcano
on the south, and gliding gently down the mountain sides, past the Neuquem
and the Rio Colorado on to the Pampas, till we reach the Sierra Tapalquen,
from whence we shall see the frontier of the province of Buenos Ayres. These
we shall pass by, and cross over the Sierra Tandil, pursuing our search to the
very shores of the Atlantic, as far as Point Medano.”
Paganel went through this programme of the expedition without so much
as a glance at the map. He was so posted up in the travels of Frezier, Molina,
Humboldt, Miers, and Orbigny, that he had the geographical nomenclature at
his fingers’ ends, and could trust implicitly to his never-failing memory.
“You see then, friend,” he added, “that it is a straight course. In thirty days
we shall have gone over it, and gained the eastern side before the DUNCAN,
however little she may be delayed by the westerly winds.”
“Then the DUNCAN is to cruise between Corrientes and Cape Saint
Antonie,” said John Mangles.
“Just so.”
“And how is the expedition to be organized?” asked Glenarvan.
“As simply as possible. All there is to be done is to reconnoiter the
situation of Captain Grant and not to come to gunshot with the Indians. I think
that Lord Glenarvan, our natural leader; the Major, who would not yield his
place to anybody; and your humble servant, Jacques Paganel.”
“And me,” interrupted Robert.
“Robert, Robert!” exclaimed Mary.
“And why not?” returned Paganel. “Travels form the youthful mind. Yes,
Robert, we four and three of the sailors.”
“And does your Lordship mean to pass me by?” said John Mangles,
addressing his master.
“My dear John,” replied Glenarvan, “we leave passengers on board, those
dearer to us than life, and who is to watch over them but the devoted captain?”
“Then we can’t accompany you?” said Lady Helena, while a shade of
sadness beclouded her eyes.
“My dear Helena, the journey will so soon be accomplished that it will be
but a brief separation, and—”
“Yes, dear, I understand, it is all right; and I do hope you may succeed.”
“Besides, you can hardly call it a journey,” added Paganel.
“What is it, then?”
“It is just making a flying passage across the continent, the way a good
man goes through the world, doing all the good he can. Transire beneficiendo
—that is our motto.”
This ended the discussion, if a conversation can be so called, where all
who take part in it are of the same opinion. Preparations commenced the same
day, but as secretly as possible to prevent the Indians getting scent of it.
The day of departure was fixed for the 14th of October. The sailors were
all so eager to join the expedition that Glenarvan found the only way to
prevent jealousy among them was to draw lots who should go. This was
accordingly done, and fortune favored the chief officer, Tom Austin, Wilson, a
strong, jovial young fellow, and Mulrady, so good a boxer that he might have
entered the lists with Tom Sayers himself.
Glenarvan displayed the greatest activity about the preparations, for he was
anxious to be ready by the appointed day. John Mangles was equally busy in
coaling the vessel, that she might weigh anchor at the same time. There was
quite a rivalry between Glenarvan and the young captain about getting first to
the Argentine coast.
Both were ready on the 14th. The whole search party assembled in the
saloon to bid farewell to those who remained behind. The DUNCAN was just
about to get under way, and already the vibration of the screw began to agitate
the limpid waters of Talcahuano, Glenarvan, Paganel, McNabbs, Robert Grant,
Tom Austin, Wilson, and Mulrady, stood armed with carbines and Colt’s
revolvers. Guides and mules awaited them at the landing stairs of the harbor.
“It is time,” said Lord Glenarvan at last.
“Go then, dear Edward,” said Lady Helena, restraining her emotion.
Lord Glenarvan clasped her closely to his breast for an instant, and then
turned away, while Robert flung his arms round Mary’s neck.
“And now, friends,” said Paganel, “let’s have one good hearty shake of the
hand all round, to last us till we get to the shores of the Atlantic.”
This was not much to ask, but he certainly got strong enough grips to go
some way towards satisfying his desire.
All went on deck now, and the seven explorers left the vessel. They were
soon on the quay, and as the yacht turned round to pursue her course, she came
so near where they stood, that Lady Helena could exchange farewells once
more.
“God help you!” she called out.
“Heaven will help us, madam,” shouted Paganel, in reply, “for you may be
sure we’ll help ourselves.”
“Go on,” sung out the captain to his engineer.
At the same moment Lord Glenarvan gave the signal to start, and away
went the mules along the coast, while the DUNCAN steamed out at full speed
toward the broad ocean.
CHAPTER XI TRAVELING IN CHILI
The native troops organized by Lord Glenarvan consisted of three men and
a boy. The captain of the muleteers was an Englishman, who had become
naturalized through twenty years’ residence in the country. He made a
livelihood by letting out mules to travelers, and leading them over the difficult
passes of the Cordilleras, after which he gave them in charge of a
BAQUEANO, or Argentine guide, to whom the route through the Pampas was
perfectly familiar. This Englishman had not so far forgotten his mother tongue
among mules and Indians that he could not converse with his countrymen, and
a lucky thing it was for them, as Lord Glenarvan found it far easier to give
orders than to see them executed, Paganel was still unsuccessful in making
himself understood.
The CATAPEZ, as he was called in Chilian, had two natives called
PEONS, and a boy about twelve years of age under him. The PEONS took
care of the baggage mules, and the boy led the MADRINA, a young mare
adorned with rattle and bells, which walked in front, followed by ten mules.
The travelers rode seven of these, and the CATAPEZ another. The remaining
two carried provisions and a few bales of goods, intended to secure the
goodwill of the Caciques of the plain. The PEONS walked, according to their
usual habit.
Every arrangement had been made to insure safety and speed, for crossing
the Andes is something more than an ordinary journey. It could not be
accomplished without the help of the hardy mules of the far-famed Argentine
breed. Those reared in the country are much superior to their progenitors.
They are not particular about their food, and only drink once a day, and they
can go with ease ten leagues in eight hours.
There are no inns along this road from one ocean to another. The only
viands on which travelers can regale themselves are dried meat, rice seasoned
with pimento, and such game as may be shot en route. The torrents provide
them with water in the mountains, and the rivulets in the plains, which they
improve by the addition of a few drops of rum, and each man carries a supply
of this in a bullock’s horn, called CHIFFLE. They have to be careful, however,
not to indulge too freely in alcoholic drinks, as the climate itself has a
peculiarly exhilarating effect on the nervous system. As for bedding, it is all
contained in the saddle used by the natives, called RECADO. This saddle is
made of sheepskins, tanned on one side and woolly on the other, fastened by
gorgeous embroidered straps. Wrapped in these warm coverings a traveler
may sleep soundly, and brave exposure to the damp nights.
Glenarvan, an experienced traveler, who knew how to adapt himself to the
customs of other countries, adopted the Chilian costume for himself and his
whole party. Paganel and Robert, both alike children, though of different
growth, were wild with delight as they inserted their heads in the national
PONCHO, an immense plaid with a hole in center, and their legs in high
leather boots. The mules were richly caparisoned, with the Arab bit in their
mouths, and long reins of plaited leather, which served as a whip; the headstall
of the bridle was decorated with metal ornaments, and the ALFORJAS, double
sacks of gay colored linen, containing the day’s provisions. Paganel,
DISTRAIT as usual, was flung several times before he succeeded in bestriding
his good steed, but once in the saddle, his inseparable telescope on his
shoulder-belt, he held on well enough, keeping his feet fast in the stirrups, and
trusting entirely to the sagacity of his beast. As for Robert, his first attempt at
mounting was successful, and proved that he had the making in him of an
excellent horseman.
The weather was splendid when they started, the sky a deep cloudless blue,
and yet the atmosphere so tempered by the sea breezes as to prevent any
feeling of oppressive heat. They marched rapidly along the winding shore of
the bay of Talcahuano, in order to gain the extremity of the parallel, thirty
miles south. No one spoke much the first day, for the smoke of the DUNCAN
was still visible on the horizon, and the pain of parting too keenly felt. Paganel
talked to himself in Spanish, asking and answering questions.
The CATAPEZ, moreover, was a taciturn man naturally, and had not been
rendered loquacious by his calling. He hardly spoke to his PEONS. They
understood their duties perfectly. If one of the mules stopped, they urged it on
with a guttural cry, and if that proved unavailing, a good-sized pebble, thrown
with unerring aim, soon cured the animal’s obstinacy. If a strap got loose, or a
rein fell, a PEON came forward instantly, and throwing off his poncho, flung it
over his beast’s head till the accident was repaired and the march resumed.
The custom of the muleteers is to start immediately after breakfast, about
eight o’clock, and not to stop till they camp for the night, about 4 P. M.
Glenarvan fell in with the practice, and the first halt was just as they arrived at
Arauco, situated at the very extremity of the bay. To find the extremity of the
37th degree of latitude, they would have required to proceed as far as the Bay
of Carnero, twenty miles further. But the agents of Glenarvan had already
scoured that part of the coast, and to repeat the exploration would have been
useless. It was, therefore, decided that Arauco should be the point of
departure, and they should keep on from there toward the east in a straight
line.
Since the weather was so favorable, and the whole party, even Robert,
were in perfect health, and altogether the journey had commenced under such
favorable auspices, it was deemed advisable to push forward as quickly as
possible. Accordingly, the next day they marched 35 miles or more, and
encamped at nightfall on the banks of Rio Biobio. The country still presented
the same fertile aspect, and abounded in flowers, but animals of any sort only
came in sight occasionally, and there were no birds visible, except a solitary
heron or owl, and a thrush or grebe, flying from the falcon. Human beings
there were none, not a native appeared; not even one of the GUASSOS, the
degenerate offspring of Indians and Spaniards, dashed across the plain like a
shadow, his flying steed dripping with blood from the cruel thrusts inflicted by
the gigantic spurs of his master’s naked feet. It was absolutely impossible to
make inquiries when there was no one to address, and Lord Glenarvan came to
the conclusion that Captain Grant must have been dragged right over the
Andes into the Pampas, and that it would be useless to search for him
elsewhere. The only thing to be done was to wait patiently and press forward
with all the speed in their power.
On the 17th they set out in the usual line of march, a line which it was hard
work for Robert to keep, his ardor constantly compelled him to get ahead of
the MADRINA, to the great despair of his mule. Nothing but a sharp recall
from Glenarvan kept the boy in proper order.
The country now became more diversified, and the rising ground indicated
their approach to a mountainous district. Rivers were more numerous, and
came rushing noisily down the slopes. Paganel consulted his maps, and when
he found any of those streams not marked, which often happened, all the fire
of a geographer burned in his veins, and he would exclaim, with a charming
air of vexation:
“A river which hasn’t a name is like having no civil standing. It has no
existence in the eye of geographical law.”
He christened them forthwith, without the least hesitation, and marked
them down on the map, qualifying them with the most high-sounding
adjectives he could find in the Spanish language.
“What a language!” he said. “How full and sonorous it is! It is like the
metal church bells are made of—composed of seventy-eight parts of copper
and twenty-two of tin.”
“But, I say, do you make any progress in it?” asked Glenarvan.
“Most certainly, my dear Lord. Ah, if it wasn’t the accent, that wretched
accent!”
And for want of better work, Paganel whiled away the time along the road
by practising the difficulties in pronunciation, repeating all the break-jaw
words he could, though still making geographical observations. Any question
about the country that Glenarvan might ask the CATAPEZ was sure to be
answered by the learned Frenchman before he could reply, to the great
astonishment of the guide, who gazed at him in bewilderment.
About two o’clock that same day they came to a cross road, and naturally
enough Glenarvan inquired the name of it.
“It is the route from Yumbel to Los Angeles,” said Paganel.
Glenarvan looked at the CATAPEZ, who replied:
“Quite right.”
And then, turning toward the geographer, he added:
“You have traveled in these parts before, sir?”
“Oh, yes,” said Paganel, quite gravely.
“On a mule?”
“No, in an easy chair.”
The CATAPEZ could not make him out, but shrugged his shoulders and
resumed his post at the head of the party.
At five in the evening they stopped in a gorge of no great depth, some
miles above the little town of Loja, and encamped for the night at the foot of
the Sierras, the first steppes of the great Cordilleras.
CHAPTER XII ELEVEN THOUSAND FEET ALOFT
Nothing of importance had occurred hitherto in the passage through Chili;
but all the obstacles and difficulties incident to a mountain journey were about
to crowd on the travelers now.
One important question had first to be settled. Which pass would take them
over the Andes, and yet not be out of their fixed route?
On questioning the CATAPEZ on the subject, he replied:
“There are only two practicable passes that I know of in this part of the
Cordilleras.”
“The pass of Arica is one undoubtedly discovered by Valdivia Mendoze,”
said Paganel.
“Just so.”
“And that of Villarica is the other.”
“Precisely.”
“Well, my good fellow, both these passes have only one fault; they take us
too far out of our route, either north or south.”
“Have you no other to propose?” asked the Major.
“Certainly,” replied Paganel. “There is the pass of Antuco, on the slope of
the volcano, in latitude, 37 degrees 30’ , or, in other words, only half a degree
out of our way.”
“That would do, but are you acquainted with this pass of Antuco,
CATAPEZ?” said Glenarvan.
“Yes, your Lordship, I have been through it, but I did not mention it, as no
one goes that way but the Indian shepherds with the herds of cattle.”
“Oh, very well; if mares and sheep and oxen can go that way, we can, so
let’s start at once.”
The signal for departure was given immediately, and they struck into the
heart of the valley of Las Lejas, between great masses of chalk crystal. From
this point the pass began to be difficult, and even dangerous. The angles of the
declivities widened and the ledges narrowed, and frightful precipices met their
gaze. The mules went cautiously along, keeping their heads near the ground,
as if scenting the track. They marched in file. Sometimes at a sudden bend of
the road, the MADRINA would disappear, and the little caravan had to guide
themselves by the distant tinkle of her bell. Often some capricious winding
would bring the column in two parallel lines, and the CATAPEZ could speak
to his PEONS across a crevasse not two fathoms wide, though two hundred
deep, which made between them an inseparable gulf.
Glenarvan followed his guide step by step. He saw that his perplexity was
increasing as the way became more difficult, but did not dare to interrogate
him, rightly enough, perhaps, thinking that both mules and muleteers were
very much governed by instinct, and it was best to trust to them.
For about an hour longer the CATAPEZ kept wandering about almost at
haphazard, though always getting higher up the mountains. At last he was
obliged to stop short. They were in a narrow valley, one of those gorges called
by the Indians “quebrads,” and on reaching the end, a wall of porphyry rose
perpendicularly before them, and barred further passage. The CATAPEZ, after
vain attempts at finding an opening, dismounted, crossed his arms, and waited.
Glenarvan went up to him and asked if he had lost his way.
“No, your Lordship,” was the reply.
“But you are not in the pass of Antuco.”
“We are.”
“You are sure you are not mistaken?”
“I am not mistaken. See! there are the remains of a fire left by the Indians,
and there are the marks of the mares and the sheep.”
“They must have gone on then.”
“Yes, but no more will go; the last earthquake has made the route
impassable.”
“To mules,” said the Major, “but not to men.”
“Ah, that’s your concern; I have done all I could. My mules and myself are
at your service to try the other passes of the Cordilleras.”
“And that would delay us?”
“Three days at least.”
Glenarvan listened silently. He saw the CATAPEZ was right. His mules
could not go farther. When he talked of returning, however, Glenarvan
appealed to his companions and said:
“Will you go on in spite of all the difficulty?”
“We will follow your Lordship,” replied Tom Austin.
“And even precede you,” added Paganel. “What is it after all? We have
only to cross the top of the mountain chain, and once over, nothing can be
easier of descent than the slopes we shall find there. When we get below, we
shall find BAQUEANOS, Argentine shepherds, who will guide us through the
Pampas, and swift horses accustomed to gallop over the plains. Let’s go
forward then, I say, and without a moment’s hesitation.”
“Forward!” they all exclaimed. “You will not go with us, then?” said
Glenarvan to the CATAPEZ.
“I am the muleteer,” was the reply.
“As you please,” said Glenarvan.
“We can do without him,” said Paganel. “On the other side we shall get
back into the road to Antuco, and I’m quite sure I’ll lead you to the foot of the
mountain as straight as the best guide in the Cordilleras.”
Accordingly, Glenarvan settled accounts with the CATAPEZ, and bade
farewell to him and his PEONS and mules. The arms and instruments, and a
small stock of provisions were divided among the seven travelers, and it was
unanimously agreed that the ascent should recommence at once, and, if
necessary, should continue part of the night. There was a very steep winding
path on the left, which the mules never would have attempted. It was toilsome
work, but after two hours’ exertion, and a great deal of roundabout climbing,
the little party found themselves once more in the pass of Antuco.
They were not far now from the highest peak of the Cordilleras, but there
was not the slightest trace of any beaten path. The entire region had been
overturned by recent shocks of earthquake, and all they could do was to keep
on climbing higher and higher. Paganel was rather disconcerted at finding no
way out to the other side of the chain, and laid his account with having to
undergo great fatigue before the topmost peaks of the Andes could be reached,
for their mean height is between eleven and twelve thousand six hundred feet.
Fortunately the weather was calm and the sky clear, in addition to the season
being favorable, but in Winter, from May to October, such an ascent would
have been impracticable. The intense cold quickly kills travelers, and those
who even manage to hold out against it fall victims to the violence of the
TEMPORALES, a sort of hurricane peculiar to those regions, which yearly
fills the abysses of the Cordilleras with dead bodies.
They went on toiling steadily upward all night, hoisting themselves up to
almost inaccessible plateaux, and leaping over broad, deep crevasses. They
had no ropes, but arms linked in arms supplied the lack, and shoulders served
for ladders. The strength of Mulrady and the dexterity of Wilson were taxed
heavily now. These two brave Scots multiplied themselves, so to speak. Many
a time, but for their devotion and courage the small band could not have gone
on. Glenarvan never lost sight of young Robert, for his age and vivacity made
him imprudent. Paganel was a true Frenchman in his impetuous ardor, and
hurried furiously along. The Major, on the contrary, only went as quick as was
necessary, neither more nor less, climbing without the least apparent exertion.
Perhaps he hardly knew, indeed, that he was climbing at all, or perhaps he
fancied he was descending.
The whole aspect of the region had now completely changed. Huge blocks
of glittering ice, of a bluish tint on some of the declivities, stood up on all
sides, reflecting the early light of morn. The ascent became very perilous.
They were obliged to reconnoiter carefully before making a single step, on
account of the crevasses. Wilson took the lead, and tried the ground with his
feet. His companions followed exactly in his footprints, lowering their voices
to a whisper, as the least sound would disturb the currents of air, and might
cause the fall of the masses of snow suspended in the air seven or eight
hundred feet above their heads.
They had come now to the region of shrubs and bushes, which, higher still,
gave place to grasses and cacti. At 11,000 feet all trace of vegetation had
disappeared. They had only stopped once, to rest and snatch a hurried meal to
recruit their strength. With superhuman courage, the ascent was then resumed
amid increasing dangers and difficulties. They were forced to bestride sharp
peaks and leap over chasms so deep that they did not dare to look down them.
In many places wooden crosses marked the scene of some great catastrophes.
About two o’clock they came to an immense barren plain, without a sign
of vegetation. The air was dry and the sky unclouded blue. At this elevation
rain is unknown, and vapors only condense into snow or hail. Here and there
peaks of porphyry or basalt pierced through the white winding-sheet like the
bones of a skeleton; and at intervals fragments of quartz or gneiss, loosened by
the action of the air, fell down with a faint, dull sound, which in a denser
atmosphere would have been almost imperceptible.
However, in spite of their courage, the strength of the little band was
giving way. Glenarvan regretted they had gone so far into the interior of the
mountain when he saw how exhausted his men had become. Young Robert
held out manfully, but he could not go much farther.
At three o’clock Glenarvan stopped and said:
“We must rest.”
He knew if he did not himself propose it, no one else would.
“Rest?” rejoined Paganel; “we have no place of shelter.”
“It is absolutely necessary, however, if it were only for Robert.”
“No, no,” said the courageous lad; “I can still walk; don’t stop.”
“You shall be carried, my boy; but we must get to the other side of the
Cordilleras, cost what it may. There we may perhaps find some hut to cover
us. All I ask is a two hours’ longer march.”
“Are you all of the same opinion?” said Glenarvan.
“Yes,” was the unanimous reply: and Mulrady added, “I’ll carry the boy.”
The march eastward was forthwith resumed. They had a frightful height to
climb yet to gain the topmost peaks. The rarefaction of the atmosphere
produced that painful oppression known by the name of PUNA. Drops of
blood stood on the gums and lips, and respiration became hurried and difficult.
However strong the will of these brave men might be, the time came at last
when their physical powers failed, and vertigo, that terrible malady in the
mountains, destroyed not only their bodily strength but their moral energy.
Falls became frequent, and those who fell could not rise again, but dragged
themselves along on their knees.
But just as exhaustion was about to make short work of any further ascent,
and Glenarvan’s heart began to sink as he thought of the snow lying far as the
eye could reach, and of the intense cold, and saw the shadow of night fast
overspreading the desolate peaks, and knew they had not a roof to shelter
them, suddenly the Major stopped and said, in a calm voice, “A hut!”
CHAPTER XIII A SUDDEN DESCENT
Anyone else but McNabbs might have passed the hut a hundred times, and
gone all round it, and even over it without suspecting its existence. It was
covered with snow, and scarcely distinguishable from the surrounding rocks;
but Wilson and Mulrady succeeded in digging it out and clearing the opening
after half an hour’s hard work, to the great joy of the whole party, who eagerly
took possession of it.
They found it was a CASUCHA, constructed by the Indians, made of
ADOBES, a species of bricks baked in the sun. Its form was that of a cube, 12
feet on each side, and it stood on a block of basalt. A stone stair led up to the
door, the only opening; and narrow as this door was, the hurricane, and snow,
and hail found their way in when the TEMPORALES were unchained in the
mountains.
Ten people could easily find room in it, and though the walls might be
none too water-tight in the rainy season, at this time of the year, at any rate, it
was sufficient protection against the intense cold, which, according to the
thermometer, was ten degrees below zero. Besides, there was a sort of
fireplace in it, with a chimney of bricks, badly enough put together, certainly,
but still it allowed of a fire being lighted.
“This will shelter us, at any rate,” said Glenarvan, “even if it is not very
comfortable. Providence has led us to it, and we can only be thankful.”
“Why, it is a perfect palace, I call it,” said Paganel; “we only want flunkeys
and courtiers. We shall do capital here.”
“Especially when there is a good fire blazing on the hearth, for we are
quite as cold as we are hungry. For my part, I would rather see a good faggot
just now than a slice of venison.”
“Well, Tom, we’ll try and get some combustible or other,” said Paganel.
“Combustibles on the top of the Cordilleras!” exclaimed Mulrady, in a
dubious tone.
“Since there is a chimney in the CASUCHA,” said the Major, “the
probability is that we shall find something to burn in it.”
“Our friend McNabbs is right,” said Glenarvan. “Get everything in
readiness for supper, and I’ll go out and turn woodcutter.”
“Wilson and I will go with you,” said Paganel.
“Do you want me?” asked Robert, getting up.
“No, my brave boy, rest yourself. You’ll be a man, when others are only
children at your age,” replied Glenarvan.
On reaching the little mound of porphyry, Glenarvan and his two
companions left the CASUCHA. In spite of the perfect calmness of the
atmosphere, the cold was stinging. Paganel consulted his barometer, and found
that the depression of the mercury corresponded to an elevation of 11,000 feet,
only 910 meters lower than Mont Blanc. But if these mountains had presented
the difficulties of the giant of the Swiss Alps, not one of the travelers could
have crossed the great chain of the New World.
On reaching a little mound of porphyry, Glenarvan and Paganel stopped to
gaze about them and scan the horizon on all sides. They were now on the
summit of the Nevadas of the Cordilleras, and could see over an area of forty
miles. The valley of the Colorado was already sunk in shadow, and night was
fast drawing her mantle over the eastern slopes of the Andes. The western side
was illumined by the rays of the setting sun, and peaks and glaciers flashed
back his golden beams with dazzling radiance. On the south the view was
magnificent. Across the wild valley of the Torbido, about two miles distant,
rose the volcano of Antuco. The mountain roared like some enormous
monster, and vomited red smoke, mingled with torrents of sooty flame. The
surrounding peaks appeared on fire. Showers of red-hot stones, clouds of
reddish vapor and rockets of lava, all combined, presented the appearance of
glowing sparkling streams. The splendor of the spectacle increased every
instant as night deepened, and the whole sky became lighted up with a
dazzling reflection of the blazing crater, while the sun, gradually becoming
shorn of his sunset glories, disappeared like a star lost in the distant darkness
of the horizon.
Paganel and Glenarvan would have remained long enough gazing at the
sublime struggle between the fires of earth and heaven, if the more practical
Wilson had not reminded them of the business on hand. There was no wood to
be found, however, but fortunately the rocks were covered with a poor, dry
species of lichen. Of this they made an ample provision, as well as of a plant
called LLARETTA, the root of which burns tolerably well. This precious
combustible was carried back to the CASUCHA and heaped up on the hearth.
It was a difficult matter to kindle it, though, and still more to keep it alight.
The air was so rarefied that there was scarcely oxygen enough in it to support
combustion. At least, this was the reason assigned by the Major.
“By way of compensation, however,” he added, “water will boil at less
than 100 degrees heat. It will come to the point of ebullition before 99
degrees.”
McNabbs was right, as the thermometer proved, for it was plunged into the
kettle when the water boiled, and the mercury only rose to 99 degrees. Coffee
was soon ready, and eagerly gulped down by everybody. The dry meat
certainly seemed poor fare, and Paganel couldn’t help saying:
“I tell you what, some grilled llama wouldn’t be bad with this, would it?
They say that the llama is substitute for the ox and the sheep, and I should like
to know if it is, in an alimentary respect.”
“What!” replied the Major. “You’re not content with your supper, most
learned Paganel.”
“Enchanted with it, my brave Major; still I must confess I should not say
no to a dish of llama.”
“You are a Sybarite.”
“I plead guilty to the charge. But come, now, though you call me that, you
wouldn’t sulk at a beefsteak yourself, would you?”
“Probably not.”
“And if you were asked to lie in wait for a llama, notwithstanding the cold
and the darkness, you would do it without the least hesitation?”
“Of course; and if it will give you the slightest pleasure—”
His companions had hardly time to thank him for his obliging good nature,
when distant and prolonged howls broke on their ear, plainly not proceeding
from one or two solitary animals, but from a whole troop, and one, moreover,
that was rapidly approaching.
Providence had sent them a supper, as well as led them to a hut. This was
the geographer’s conclusion; but Glenarvan damped his joy somewhat by
remarking that the quadrupeds of the Cordilleras are never met with in such a
high latitude.
“Then where can these animals come from?” asked Tom Austin. “Don’t
you hear them getting nearer!”
“An avalanche,” suggested Mulrady.
“Impossible,” returned Paganel. “That is regular howling.”
“Let us go out and see,” said Glenarvan.
“Yes, and be ready for hunting,” replied McNabbs, arming himself with his
carbine.
They all rushed forthwith out of the CASUCHA. Night had completely set
in, dark and starry. The moon, now in her last quarter, had not yet risen. The
peaks on the north and east had disappeared from view, and nothing was
visible save the fantastic SILHOUETTE of some towering rocks here and
there. The howls, and clearly the howls of terrified animals, were redoubled.
They proceeded from that part of the Cordilleras which lay in darkness. What
could be going on there? Suddenly a furious avalanche came down, an
avalanche of living animals mad with fear. The whole plateau seemed to
tremble. There were hundreds, perhaps thousands, of these animals, and in
spite of the rarefied atmosphere, their noise was deafening. Were they wild
beasts from the Pampas, or herds of llamas and vicunas? Glenarvan,
McNabbs, Robert, Austin, and the two sailors, had just time to throw
themselves flat on the ground before they swept past like a whirlwind, only a
few paces distant. Paganel, who had remained standing, to take advantage of
his peculiar powers of sight, was knocked down in a twinkling. At the same
moment the report of firearms was heard. The Major had fired, and it seemed
to him that an animal had fallen close by, and that the whole herd, yelling
louder than ever, had rushed down and disappeared among the declivities
lighted up by the reflection of the volcano.
“Ah, I’ve got them,” said a voice, the voice of Paganel.
“Got what?” asked Glenarvan.
“My spectacles,” was the reply. “One might expect to lose that much in
such a tumult as this.”
“You are not wounded, I hope?”
“No, only knocked down; but by what?”
“By this,” replied the Major, holding up the animal he had killed.
They all hastened eagerly into the hut, to examine McNabbs’ prize by the
light of the fire.
It was a pretty creature, like a small camel without a hump. The head was
small and the body flattened, the legs were long and slender, the skin fine, and
the hair the color of cafe au lait.
Paganel had scarcely looked at it before he exclaimed, “A guanaco!”
“What sort of an animal is that?” asked Glenarvan.
“One you can eat.”
“And it is good savory meat, I assure you; a dish of Olympus! I knew we
should have fresh meat for supper, and such meat! But who is going to cut up
the beast?”
“I will,” said Wilson.
“Well, I’ll undertake to cook it,” said Paganel.
“Can you cook, then, Monsieur Paganel?” asked Robert.
“I should think so, my boy. I’m a Frenchman, and in every Frenchman
there is a cook.”
Five minutes afterward Paganel began to grill large slices of venison on the
embers made by the use of the LLARETTAS, and in about ten minutes a dish
was ready, which he served up to his companions by the tempting name of
guanaco cutlets. No one stood on ceremony, but fell to with a hearty good will.
To the absolute stupefaction of the geographer, however, the first mouthful
was greeted with a general grimace, and such exclamations as—“Tough!” “It
is horrible.” “It is not eatable.”
The poor SAVANT was obliged to own that his cutlets could not be
relished, even by hungry men. They began to banter him about his “Olympian
dish,” and indulge in jokes at his expense; but all he cared about was to find
out how it happened that the flesh of the guanaco, which was certainly good
and eatable food, had turned out so badly in his hands. At last light broke in on
him, and he called out:
“I see through it now! Yes, I see through it. I have found out the secret
now.”
“The meat was too long kept, was it?” asked McNabbs, quietly.
“No, but the meat had walked too much. How could I have forgotten that?”
“What do you mean?” asked Tom Austin.
“I mean this: the guanaco is only good for eating when it is killed in a state
of rest. If it has been long hunted, and gone over much ground before it is
captured, it is no longer eatable. I can affirm the fact by the mere taste, that
this animal has come a great distance, and consequently the whole herd has.”
“You are certain of this?” asked Glenarvan.
“Absolutely certain.”
“But what could have frightened the creatures so, and driven them from
their haunts, when they ought to have been quietly sleeping?”
“That’s a question, my dear Glenarvan, I could not possibly answer. Take
my advice, and let us go to sleep without troubling our heads about it. I say,
Major, shall we go to sleep?”
“Yes, we’ll go to sleep, Paganel.”
Each one, thereupon, wrapped himself up in his poncho, and the fire was
made up for the night.
Loud snores in every tune and key soon resounded from all sides of the
hut, the deep bass contribution of Paganel completing the harmony.
But Glenarvan could not sleep. Secret uneasiness kept him in a continual
state of wakefulness. His thoughts reverted involuntarily to those frightened
animals flying in one common direction, impelled by one common terror.
They could not be pursued by wild beasts, for at such an elevation there were
almost none to be met with, and of hunters still fewer. What terror then could
have driven them among the precipices of the Andes? Glenarvan felt a
presentiment of approaching danger.
But gradually he fell into a half-drowsy state, and his apprehensions were
lulled. Hope took the place of fear. He saw himself on the morrow on the
plains of the Andes, where the search would actually commence, and perhaps
success was close at hand. He thought of Captain Grant and his two sailors,
and their deliverance from cruel bondage. As these visions passed rapidly
through his mind, every now and then he was roused by the crackling of the
fire, or sparks flying out, or some little jet of flame would suddenly flare up
and illumine the faces of his slumbering companions.
Then his presentiments returned in greater strength than before, and he
listened anxiously to the sounds outside the hut.
At certain intervals he fancied he could hear rumbling noises in the
distance, dull and threatening like the mutter-ings of thunder before a storm.
There surely must be a storm raging down below at the foot of the mountains.
He got up and went out to see.
The moon was rising. The atmosphere was pure and calm. Not a cloud
visible either above or below. Here and there was a passing reflection from the
flames of Antuco, but neither storm nor lightning, and myriads of bright stars
studded the zenith. Still the rumbling noises continued. They seemed to meet
together and cross the chain of the Andes. Glenarvan returned to the
CASUCHA more uneasy than ever, questioning within himself as to the
connection between these sounds and the flight of the guanacos. He looked at
his watch and found the time was about two in the morning. As he had no
certainty, however, of any immediate danger, he did not wake his companions,
who were sleeping soundly after their fatigue, and after a little dozed off
himself, and slumbered heavily for some hours.
All of a sudden a violent crash made him start to his feet. A deafening
noise fell on his ear like the roar of artillery. He felt the ground giving way
beneath him, and the CASUCHA rocked to and fro, and opened.
He shouted to his companions, but they were already awake, and tumbling
pell-mell over each other. They were being rapidly dragged down a steep
declivity. Day dawned and revealed a terrible scene. The form of the
mountains changed in an instant. Cones were cut off. Tottering peaks
disappeared as if some trap had opened at their base. Owing to a peculiar
phenomenon of the Cordilleras, an enormous mass, many miles in extent, had
been displaced entirely, and was speeding down toward the plain.
“An earthquake!” exclaimed Paganel. He was not mistaken. It was one of
those cataclysms frequent in Chili, and in this very region where Copiapo had
been twice destroyed, and Santiago four times laid in ruins in fourteen years.
This region of the globe is so underlaid with volcanic fires and the volcanoes
of recent origin are such insufficient safety valves for the subterranean vapors,
that shocks are of frequent occurrence, and are called by the people
TREMBLORES.
The plateau to which the seven men were clinging, holding on by tufts of
lichen, and giddy and terrified in the extreme, was rushing down the declivity
with the swiftness of an express, at the rate of fifty miles an hour. Not a cry
was possible, nor an attempt to get off or stop. They could not even have heard
themselves speak. The internal rumblings, the crash of the avalanches, the fall
of masses of granite and basalt, and the whirlwind of pulverized snow, made
all communication impossible. Sometimes they went perfectly smoothly along
without jolts or jerks, and sometimes on the contrary, the plateau would reel
and roll like a ship in a storm, coasting past abysses in which fragments of the
mountain were falling, tearing up trees by the roots, and leveling, as if with the
keen edge of an immense scythe, every projection of the declivity.
How long this indescribable descent would last, no one could calculate, nor
what it would end in ultimately. None of the party knew whether the rest were
still alive, whether one or another were not already lying in the depths of some
abyss. Almost breathless with the swift motion, frozen with the cold air, which
pierced them through, and blinded with the whirling snow, they gasped for
breath, and became exhausted and nearly inanimate, only retaining their hold
of the rocks by a powerful instinct of self-preservation. Suddenly a
tremendous shock pitched them right off, and sent them rolling to the very foot
of the mountain. The plateau had stopped.
For some minutes no one stirred. At last one of the party picked himself
up, and stood on his feet, stunned by the shock, but still firm on his legs. This
was the Major. He shook off the blinding snow and looked around him. His
companions lay in a close circle like the shots from a gun that has just been
discharged, piled one on top of another.
The Major counted them. All were there except one—that one was Robert
Grant.
CHAPTER XIV PROVIDENTIALLY RESCUED
The eastern side of the Cordilleras of the Andes consists of a succession of
lengthened declivities, which slope down almost insensibly to the plain. The
soil is carpeted with rich herbage, and adorned with magnificent trees, among
which, in great numbers, were apple-trees, planted at the time of the conquest,
and golden with fruit. There were literally, perfect forests of these. This
district was, in fact, just a corner of fertile Normandy.
The sudden transition from a desert to an oasis, from snowy peaks to
verdant plains, from Winter to Summer, can not fail to strike the traveler’s eye.
The ground, moreover, had recovered its immobility. The trembling had
ceased, though there was little doubt the forces below the surface were
carrying on their devastating work further on, for shocks of earthquake are
always occurring in some part or other of the Andes. This time the shock had
been one of extreme violence. The outline of the mountains was wholly
altered, and the Pampas guides would have sought vainly for the accustomed
landmarks.
A magnificent day had dawned. The sun was just rising from his ocean
bed, and his bright rays streamed already over the Argentine plains, and ran
across to the Atlantic. It was about eight o’clock.
Lord Glenarvan and his companions were gradually restored to animation
by the Major’s efforts. They had been completely stunned, but had sustained
no injury whatever. The descent of the Cordilleras was accomplished; and as
Dame Nature had conveyed them at her own expense, they could only have
praised her method of locomotion if one of their number, and that one the
feeblest and youngest, the child of the party, had not been missing at the roll
call.
The brave boy was beloved by everybody. Paganel was particularly
attached to him, and so was the Major, with all his apparent coldness. As for
Glenarvan, he was in absolute despair when he heard of his disappearance, and
pictured to himself the child lying in some deep abyss, wildly crying for
succor.
“We must go and look for him, and look till we find him,” he exclaimed,
almost unable to keep back his tears. “We cannot leave him to his fate. Every
valley and precipice and abyss must be searched through and through. I will
have a rope fastened round my waist, and go down myself. I insist upon it; you
understand; I insist upon it. Heaven grant Robert may be still alive! If we lose
the boy, how could we ever dare to meet the father? What right have we to
save the captain at the cost of his son’s life?”
Glenarvan’s companions heard him in silence. He sought to read hope in
their eyes, but they did not venture to meet his gaze.
At last he said,
“Well, you hear what I say, but you make no response. Do you mean to tell
me that you have no hope—not the slightest?”
Again there was silence, till McNabbs asked:
“Which of you can recollect when Robert disappeared?”
No one could say.
“Well, then,” resumed the Major, “you know this at any rate. Who was the
child beside during our descent of the Cordilleras?”
“Beside me,” replied Wilson.
“Very well. Up to what moment did you see him beside you? Try if you
can remember.”
“All that I can recollect is that Robert Grant was still by my side, holding
fast by a tuft of lichen, less than two minutes before the shock which finished
our descent.”
“Less than two minutes? Mind what you are saying; I dare say a minute
seemed a very long time to you. Are you sure you are not making a mistake?”
“I don’t think I am. No; it was just about two minutes, as I tell you.”
“Very well, then; and was Robert on your right or left?”
“On my left. I remember that his poncho brushed past my face.”
“And with regard to us, how were you placed?”
“On the left also.”
“Then Robert must have disappeared on this side,” said the Major, turning
toward the mountain and pointing toward the right: “and I should judge,” he
added, “considering the time that has elapsed, that the spot where he fell is
about two miles up. Between that height and the ground is where we must
search, dividing the different zones among us, and it is there we shall find
him.”
Not another word was spoken. The six men commenced their explorations,
keeping constantly to the line they had made in their descent, examining
closely every fissure, and going into the very depths of the abysses, choked up
though they partly were with fragments of the plateau; and more than one
came out again with garments torn to rags, and feet and hands bleeding. For
many long hours these brave fellows continued their search without dreaming
of taking rest. But all in vain. The child had not only met his death on the
mountain, but found a grave which some enormous rock had sealed forever.
About one o’clock, Glenarvan and his companions met again in the valley.
Glenarvan was completely crushed with grief. He scarcely spoke. The only
words that escaped his lips amid his sighs were,
“I shall not go away! I shall not go away!”
No one of the party but could enter into his feeling, and respect it.
“Let us wait,” said Paganel to the Major and Tom Austin. “We will take a
little rest, and recruit our strength. We need it anyway, either to prolong our
search or continue our route.”
“Yes; and, as Edward wishes it, we will rest. He has still hope, but what is
it he hopes?”
“Who knows!” said Tom Austin.
“Poor Robert!” replied Paganel, brushing away a tear.
The valley was thickly wooded, and the Major had no difficulty in finding
a suitable place of encampment. He chose a clump of tall carob trees, under
which they arranged their few belongings—few indeed, for all they had were
sundry wraps and fire-arms, and a little dried meat and rice. Not far off there
was a RIO, which supplied them with water, though it was still somewhat
muddy after the disturbance of the avalanche. Mulrady soon had a fire lighted
on the grass, and a warm refreshing beverage to offer his master. But
Glenarvan refused to touch it, and lay stretched on his poncho in a state of
absolute prostration.
So the day passed, and night came on, calm and peaceful as the preceding
had been. While his companions were lying motionless, though wide awake,
Glenarvan betook himself once more to the slopes of the Cordilleras, listening
intently in hope that some cry for help would fall upon his ear. He ventured far
up in spite of his being alone, straining his ear with painful eagerness to catch
the faintest sound, and calling aloud in an agony of despair.
But he heard nothing save the beatings of his own heart, though he
wandered all night on the mountain. Sometimes the Major followed him, and
sometimes Paganel, ready to lend a helping hand among the slippery peaks
and dangerous precipices among which he was dragged by his rash and useless
imprudence. All his efforts were in vain, however, and to his repeated cries of
“Robert, Robert!” echo was the only response.
Day dawned, and it now became a matter of necessity to go and bring back
the poor Lord from the distant plateau, even against his will. His despair was
terrible. Who could dare to speak of quitting this fatal valley? Yet provisions
were done, and Argentine guides and horses were not far off to lead them to
the Pampas. To go back would be more difficult than to go forward. Besides,
the Atlantic Ocean was the appointed meeting place with the DUNCAN.
These were strong reasons against any long delay; indeed it was best for all
parties to continue the route as soon as possible.
McNabbs undertook the task of rousing Lord Glenarvan from his grief. For
a long time his cousin seemed not to hear him. At last he shook his head, and
said, almost in-audibly:
“Did you say we must start?”
“Yes, we must start.”
“Wait one hour longer.”
“Yes, we’ll wait another,” replied the Major.
The hour slipped away, and again Glenarvan begged for longer grace. To
hear his imploring tones, one might have thought him a criminal begging a
respite. So the day passed on till it was almost noon. McNabbs hesitated now
no longer, but, acting on the advice of the rest, told his cousin that start they
must, for all their lives depended on prompt action.
“Yes, yes!” replied Glenarvan. “Let us start, let us start!”
But he spoke without looking at McNabbs. His gaze was fixed intently on
a certain dark speck in the heavens. Suddenly he exclaimed, extending his
arm, and keeping it motionless, as if petrified:
“There! there! Look! look!”
All eyes turned immediately in the direction indicated so imperiously. The
dark speck was increasing visibly. It was evidently some bird hovering above
them.
“A condor,” said Paganel.
“Yes, a condor,” replied Glenarvan. “Who knows? He is coming down—he
is gradually getting lower! Let us wait.”
Paganel was not mistaken, it was assuredly a condor. This magnificent bird
is the king of the Southern Andes, and was formerly worshiped by the Incas. It
attains an extraordinary development in those regions. Its strength is
prodigious. It has frequently driven oxen over the edge of precipices down
into the depths of abysses. It seizes sheep, and kids, and young calves,
browsing on the plains, and carries them off to inaccessible heights. It hovers
in the air far beyond the utmost limits of human sight, and its powers of vision
are so great that it can discern the smallest objects on the earth beneath.
What had this condor discovered then? Could it be the corpse of Robert
Grant? “Who knows?” repeated Glenarvan, keeping his eye immovably fixed
on the bird. The enormous creature was fast approaching, sometimes hovering
for awhile with outspread wings, and sometimes falling with the swiftness of
inert bodies in space. Presently he began to wheel round in wide circles. They
could see him distinctly. He measured more than fifteen feet, and his powerful
wings bore him along with scarcely the slightest effort, for it is the prerogative
of large birds to fly with calm majesty, while insects have to beat their wings a
thousand times a second.
The Major and Wilson had seized their carbines, but Glenarvan stopped
them by a gesture. The condor was encircling in his flight a sort of
inaccessible plateau about a quarter of a mile up the side of the mountain. He
wheeled round and round with dazzling rapidity, opening and shutting his
formidable claws, and shaking his cartilaginous carbuncle, or comb.
“It is there, there!” exclaimed Glenarvan.
A sudden thought flashed across his mind, and with a terrible cry, he called
out, “Fire! fire! Oh, suppose Robert were still alive! That bird.”
But it was too late. The condor had dropped out of sight behind the crags.
Only a second passed, a second that seemed an age, and the enormous bird
reappeared, carrying a heavy load and flying at a slow rate.
A cry of horror rose on all sides. It was a human body the condor had in his
claws, dangling in the air, and apparently lifeless—it was Robert Grant. The
bird had seized him by his clothes, and had him hanging already at least one
hundred and fifty feet in the air. He had caught sight of the travelers, and was
flapping his wings violently, endeavoring to escape with his heavy prey.
“Oh! would that Robert were dashed to pieces against the rocks, rather
than be a—”
He did not finish his sentence, but seizing Wilson’s carbine, took aim at the
condor. His arm was too trembling, however, to keep the weapon steady.
“Let me do it,” said the Major. And with a calm eye, and sure hands and
motionless body, he aimed at the bird, now three hundred feet above him in
the air.
But before he had pulled the trigger the report of a gun resounded from the
bottom of the valley. A white smoke rose from between two masses of basalt,
and the condor, shot in the head, gradually turned over and began to fall,
supported by his great wings spread out like a parachute. He had not let go his
prey, but gently sank down with it on the ground, about ten paces from the
stream.
“We’ve got him, we’ve got him,” shouted Glenarvan; and without waiting
to see where the shot so providentially came from, he rushed toward the
condor, followed by his companions.
When they reached the spot the bird was dead, and the body of Robert was
quite concealed beneath his mighty wings. Glenarvan flung himself on the
corpse, and dragging it from the condor’s grasp, placed it flat on the grass, and
knelt down and put his ear to the heart.
But a wilder cry of joy never broke from human lips, than Glenarvan
uttered the next moment, as he started to his feet and exclaimed:
“He is alive! He is still alive!”
The boy’s clothes were stripped off in an instant, and his face bathed with
cold water. He moved slightly, opened his eyes, looked round and murmured,
“Oh, my Lord! Is it you!” he said; “my father!”
Glenarvan could not reply. He was speechless with emotion, and kneeling
down by the side of the child so miraculously saved, burst into tears.
CHAPTER XV THALCAVE
Robert had no sooner escaped one terrible danger than he ran the risk of
another scarcely less formidable. He was almost torn to pieces by his friends,
for the brave fellows were so overjoyed at the sight of him, that in spite of his
weak state, none of them would be satisfied without giving him a hug.
However, it seemed as if good rough hugging did not hurt sick people; at any
rate it did not hurt Robert, but quite the contrary.
But the first joy of deliverance over, the next thought was who was the
deliverer? Of course it was the Major who suggested looking for him, and he
was not far off, for about fifty paces from the RIO a man of very tall stature
was seen standing motionless on the lowest crags at the foot of the mountain.
A long gun was lying at his feet.
He had broad shoulders, and long hair bound together with leather thongs.
He was over six feet in height. His bronzed face was red between the eyes and
mouth, black by the lower eyelids, and white on the forehead. He wore the
costume of the Patagonians on the frontiers, consisting of a splendid cloak,
ornamented with scarlet arabesques, made of the skins of the guanaco, sewed
together with ostrich tendons, and with the silky wool turned up on the edge.
Under this mantle was a garment of fox-skin, fastened round the waist, and
coming down to a point in front. A little bag hung from his belt, containing
colors for painting his face. His boots were pieces of ox hide, fastened round
the ankles by straps, across.
This Patagonian had a splendid face, indicating real intelligence,
notwithstanding the medley of colors by which it was disfigured. His waiting
attitude was full of dignity; indeed, to see him standing grave and motionless
on his pedestal of rocks, one might have taken him for a statue of sang-froid.
As soon as the Major perceived him, he pointed him out to Glenarvan, who
ran toward him immediately. The Patagonian came two steps forward to meet
him, and Glenarvan caught hold of his hand and pressed it in his own. It was
impossible to mistake the meaning of the action, for the noble face of the
Scotch lord so beamed with gratitude that no words were needed. The stranger
bowed slightly in return, and said a few words that neither Glenarvan nor the
Major could understand.
The Patagonian surveyed them attentively for a few minutes, and spoke
again in another language. But this second idiom was no more intelligible than
the first. Certain words, however, caught Glenarvan’s ear as sounding like
Spanish, a few sentences of which he could speak.
“ESPANOL?” he asked.
The Patagonian nodded in reply, a movement of the head which has an
affirmative significance among all nations.
“That’s good!” said the Major. “Our friend Paganel will be the very man
for him. It is lucky for us that he took it into his head to learn Spanish.”
Paganel was called forthwith. He came at once, and saluted the stranger
with all the grace of a Frenchman. But his compliments were lost on the
Patagonian, for he did not understand a single syllable.
However, on being told how things stood, he began in Spanish, and
opening his mouth as wide as he could, the better to articulate, said:
“Vos sois um homen de bem.” (You are a brave man.)
The native listened, but made no reply.
“He doesn’t understand,” said the geographer.
“Perhaps you haven’t the right accent,” suggested the Major.
“That’s just it! Confound the accent!”
Once more Paganel repeated his compliment, but with no better success.
“I’ll change the phrase,” he said; and in slow, deliberate tones he went on,
“Sam duvida um Patagao” (A Patagonian, undoubtedly).
No response still.
“DIZEIME!” said Paganel (Answer me).
But no answer came.
“Vos compriendeis?” (Do you understand?) shouted Paganel, at the very
top of his voice, as if he would burst his throat.
Evidently the Indian did not understand, for he replied in Spanish,
“No comprendo” (I do not understand).
It was Paganel’s turn now to be amazed. He pushed his spectacles right
down over his nose, as if greatly irritated, and said,
“I’ll be hanged if I can make out one word of his infernal patois. It is
Araucanian, that’s certain!”
“Not a bit of it!” said Glenarvan. “It was Spanish he spoke.”
And addressing the Patagonian, he repeated the word, “ESPANOL?”
(Spanish?).
“Si, si” (yes, yes) replied the Indian.
Paganel’s surprise became absolute stupefaction. The Major and his cousin
exchanged sly glances, and McNabbs said, mischievously, with a look of fun
on his face, “Ah, ah, my worthy friend; is this another of your misadventures?
You seem to have quite a monopoly of them.”
“What!” said Paganel, pricking up his ear.
“Yes, it’s clear enough the man speaks Spanish.”
“He!”
“Yes, he certainly speaks Spanish. Perhaps it is some other language you
have been studying all this time instead of—”
But Paganel would not allow him to proceed. He shrugged his shoulders,
and said stiffly,
“You go a little too far, Major.”
“Well, how is it that you don’t understand him then?”
“Why, of course, because the man speaks badly,” replied the learned
geographer, getting impatient.
“He speaks badly; that is to say, because you can’t understand him,”
returned the Major coolly.
“Come, come, McNabbs,” put in Glenarvan, “your supposition is quite
inadmissable. However DISTRAIT our friend Paganel is, it is hardly likely he
would study one language for another.”
“Well, Edward—or rather you, my good Paganel—explain it then.”
“I explain nothing. I give proof. Here is the book I use daily, to practice
myself in the difficulties of the Spanish language. Examine it for yourself,
Major,” he said, handing him a volume in a very ragged condition, which he
had brought up, after a long rummage, from the depths of one of his numerous
pockets. “Now you can see whether I am imposing on you,” he continued,
indignantly.
“And what’s the name of this book?” asked the Major, as he took it from
his hand.
“The LUSIADES, an admirable epic, which—”
“The LUSIADES!” exclaimed Glenarvan.
“Yes, my friend, the LUSIADES of the great Camoens, neither more nor
less.”
“Camoens!” repeated Glenarvan; “but Paganel, my unfortunate fellow,
Camoens was a Portuguese! It is Portuguese you have been learning for the
last six weeks!”
“Camoens! LUISADES! Portuguese!” Paganel could not say more. He
looked vexed, while his companions, who had all gathered round, broke out in
a furious burst of laughter.
The Indian never moved a muscle of his face. He quietly awaited the
explanation of this incomprehensible mirth.
“Fool, idiot, that I am!” at last uttered Paganel. “Is it really a fact? You are
not joking with me? It is what I have actually been doing? Why, it is a second
confusion of tongues, like Babel. Ah me! alack-a-day! my friends, what is to
become of me? To start for India and arrive at Chili! To learn Spanish and talk
Portuguese! Why, if I go on like this, some day I shall be throwing myself out
of the window instead of my cigar!”
To hear Paganel bemoan his misadventures and see his comical
discomfiture, would have upset anyone’s gravity. Besides, he set the example
himself, and said:
“Laugh away, my friends, laugh as loud as you like; you can’t laugh at me
half as much as I laugh at myself!”
“But, I say,” said the Major, after a minute, “this doesn’t alter the fact that
we have no interpreter.”
“Oh, don’t distress yourself about that,” replied Paganel, “Portuguese and
Spanish are so much alike that I made a mistake; but this very resemblance
will be a great help toward rectifying it. In a very short time I shall be able to
thank the Patagonian in the language he speaks so well.”
Paganel was right. He soon managed to exchange a few words with the
stranger, and found out even that his name was Thalcave, a word that signified
in Araucanian, “The Thunderer.” This surname had, no doubt, come from his
skill in handling fire-arms.
But what rejoiced Glenarvan most was to learn that he was a guide by
occupation, and, moreover, a guide across the Pampas. To his mind, the
meeting with him was so providential, that he could not doubt now of the
success of their enterprise. The deliverance of Captain Grant seemed an
accomplished fact.
When the party went back to Robert, the boy held out his arms to the
Patagonian, who silently laid his hand on his head, and proceeded to examine
him with the greatest care, gently feeling each of his aching limbs. Then he
went down to the RIO, and gathered a few handfuls of wild celery, which grew
on the banks, with which he rubbed the child’s body all over. He handled him
with the most exquisite delicacy, and his treatment so revived the lad’s
strength, that it was soon evident that a few hours’ rest would set him all right.
It was accordingly decided that they should encamp for the rest of the day
and the ensuing night. Two grave questions, moreover, had to be settled:
where to get food, and means of transport. Provisions and mules were both
lacking. Happily, they had Thalcave, however, a practised guide, and one of
the most intelligent of his class. He undertook to find all that was needed, and
offered to take him to a TOLDERIA of Indians, not further than four miles off
at most, where he could get supplies of all he wanted. This proposition was
partly made by gestures, and partly by a few Spanish words which Paganel
managed to make out. His offer was accepted, and Glenarvan and his learned
friend started off with him at once.
They walked at a good pace for an hour and a half, and had to make great
strides to keep up with the giant Thalcave. The road lay through a beautiful
fertile region, abounding in rich pasturages; where a hundred thousand cattle
might have fed comfortably. Large ponds, connected by an inextricable
labyrinth of RIOS, amply watered these plains and produced their greenness.
Swans with black heads were disporting in the water, disputing possession
with the numerous intruders which gamboled over the LLANOS. The
feathered tribes were of most brilliant plumage, and of marvelous variety and
deafening noise. The isacus, a graceful sort of dove with gray feathers streaked
with white, and the yellow cardinals, were flitting about in the trees like
moving flowers; while overhead pigeons, sparrows, chingolos, bulgueros, and
mongitas, were flying swiftly along, rending the air with their piercing cries.
Paganel’s admiration increased with every step, and he had nearly
exhausted his vocabulary of adjectives by his loud exclamations, to the
astonishment of the Patagonian, to whom the birds, and the swans, and the
prairies were every day things. The learned geographer was so lost in delight,
that he seemed hardly to have started before they came in sight of the Indian
camp, or TOLDERIA, situated in the heart of a valley.
About thirty nomadic Indians were living there in rude cabins made of
branches, pasturing immense herds of milch cows, sheep, oxen, and horses.
They went from one prairie to another, always finding a well-spread table for
their four-footed guests.
These nomads were a hybrid type of Araucans, Pehu-enches, and Aucas.
They were Ando-Peruvians, of an olive tint, of medium stature and massive
form, with a low forehead, almost circular face, thin lips, high cheekbones,
effeminate features, and cold expression. As a whole, they are about the least
interesting of the Indians. However, it was their herds Glenarvan wanted, not
themselves. As long as he could get beef and horses, he cared for nothing else.
Thalcave did the bargaining. It did not take long. In exchange for seven
ready saddled horses of the Argentine breed, 100 pounds of CHARQUI, or
dried meat, several measures of rice, and leather bottles for water, the Indians
agreed to take twenty ounces of gold as they could not get wine or rum, which
they would have preferred, though they were perfectly acquainted with the
value of gold. Glenarvan wished to purchase an eighth horse for the
Patagonian, but he gave him to understand that it would be useless.
They got back to the camp in less than half an hour, and were hailed with
acclamations by the whole party or rather the provisions and horses were.
They were all hungry, and ate heartily of the welcome viands. Robert took a
little food with the rest. He was fast recovering strength. The close of the day
was spent in complete repose and pleasant talk about the dear absent ones.
Paganel never quitted the Indian’s side. It was not that he was so glad to
see a real Patagonian, by whom he looked a perfect pigmy—a Patagonian who
might have almost rivaled the Emperor Maximii, and that Congo negro seen
by the learned Van der Brock, both eight feet high; but he caught up Spanish
phrases from the Indian and studied the language without a book this time,
gesticulating at a great rate all the grand sonorous words that fell on his ear.
“If I don’t catch the accent,” he said to the Major, “it won’t be my fault;
but who would have said to me that it was a Patagonian who would teach me
Spanish one day?”
CHAPTER XVI THE NEWS OF THE LOST CAPTAIN
Next day, the 22d of October, at eight o’clock in the morning, Thalcave
gave the signal for departure. Between the 22d and 42d degrees the Argentine
soil slopes eastward, and all the travelers had to do was to follow the slope
right down to the sea.
Glenarvan had supposed Thalcave’s refusal of a horse was that he
preferred walking, as some guides do, but he was mistaken, for just as they
were ready, the Patagonian gave a peculiar whistle, and immediately a
magnificent steed of the pure Argentine breed came bounding out of a grove
close by, at his master’s call. Both in form and color the animal was of perfect
beauty. The Major, who was a thorough judge of all the good points of a horse,
was loud in admiration of this sample of the Pampas breed, and considered
that, in many respects, he greatly resembled an English hunter. This splendid
creature was called “Thaouka,” a word in Patagonia which means bird, and he
well deserved the name.
Thalcave was a consummate horseman, and to see him on his prancing
steed was a sight worth looking at. The saddle was adapted to the two hunting
weapons in common use on the Argentine plains—the BOLAS and the LAZO.
The BOLAS consists of three balls fastened together by a strap of leather,
attached to the front of the RECADO. The Indians fling them often at the
distance of a hundred feet from the animal or enemy of which they are in
pursuit, and with such precision that they catch round their legs and throw
them down in an instant. It is a formidable weapon in their hands, and one
they handle with surprising skill. The LAZO is always retained in the hand. It
is simply a rope, thirty feet long, made of tightly twisted leather, with a slip
knot at the end, which passes through an iron ring. This noose was thrown by
the right hand, while the left keeps fast hold of the rope, the other end of
which is fastened to the saddle. A long carbine, in the shoulder belt completed
the accouterments of the Patagonian.
He took his place at the head of the party, quite unconscious of the
admiration he was exciting, and they set off, going alternately at a gallop and
walking pace, for the “trot” seemed altogether unknown to them. Robert
proved to be a bold rider, and completely reassured Glenarvan as to his ability
to keep his seat.
The Pampas commenced at the very foot of the Cordilleras. They may be
divided into three parts. The first extends from the chain of the Andes, and
stretches over an extent of 250 miles covered with stunted trees and bushes;
the second 450 miles is clothed with magnificent herbage, and stops about 180
miles from Buenos Ayres; from this point to the sea, the foot of the traveler
treads over immense prairies of lucerne and thistles, which constitute the third
division of the Pampas.
On issuing from the gorges of the Cordilleras, Glenarvan and his band
came first to plains of sand, called MEDANOS, lying in ridges like waves of
the sea, and so extremely fine that the least breath of wind agitated the light
particles, and sent them flying in clouds, which rose and fell like water-spouts.
It was a spectacle which caused both pleasure and pain, for nothing could be
more curious than to see the said water-spouts wandering over the plain,
coming in contact and mingling with each other, and falling and rising in wild
confusion; but, on the other hand, nothing could be more disagreeable than the
dust which was thrown off by these innumerable MEDANOS, which was so
impalpable that close one’s eyes as they might, it found its way through the
lids.
This phenomenon lasted the greater part of the day. The travelers made
good progress, however, and about four o’clock the Cordilleras lay full forty
miles behind them, the dark outlines being already almost lost in the evening
mists. They were all somewhat fatigued with the journey, and glad enough to
halt for the night on the banks of the Neuquem, called Ramid, or Comoe by
certain geographers, a troubled, turbulent rapid flowing between high red
banks.
No incident of any importance occurred that night or the following day.
They rode well and fast, finding the ground firm, and the temperature
bearable. Toward noon, however, the sun’s rays were extremely scorching, and
when evening came, a bar of clouds streaked the southwest horizon—a sure
sign of a change in the weather. The Patagonian pointed it out to the
geographer, who replied:
“Yes, I know;” and turning to his companions, added, “see, a change of
weather is coming! We are going to have a taste of PAMPERO.”
And he went on to explain that this PAMPERO is very common in the
Argentine plains. It is an extremely dry wind which blows from the southwest.
Thalcave was not mistaken, for the PAMPERO blew violently all night, and
was sufficiently trying to poor fellows only sheltered by their ponchos. The
horses lay down on the ground, and the men stretched themselves beside them
in a close group. Glenarvan was afraid they would be delayed by the
continuance of the hurricane, but Paganel was able to reassure him on that
score, after consulting his barometer.
“The PAMPERO generally brings a tempest which lasts three days, and
may be always foretold by the depression of the mercury,” he said. “But when
the barometer rises, on the contrary, which is the case now, all we need expect
is a few violent blasts. So you can make your mind easy, my good friend; by
sunrise the sky will be quite clear again.”
“You talk like a book, Paganel,” replied Glenarvan.
“And I am one; and what’s more, you are welcome to turn over my leaves
whenever you like.”
The book was right. At one o’clock the wind suddenly lulled, and the
weary men fell asleep and woke at daybreak, refreshed and invigorated.
It was the 20th of October, and the tenth day since they had left
Talcahuano. They were still ninety miles from the point where the Rio
Colorado crosses the thirty-seventh parallel, that is to say, about two days’
journey. Glenarvan kept a sharp lookout for the appearance of any Indians,
intending to question them, through Thalcave, about Captain Grant, as Paganel
could not speak to him well enough for this. But the track they were following
was one little frequented by the natives, for the ordinary routes across the
Pampas lie further north. If by chance some nomadic horseman came in sight
far away, he was off again like a dart, not caring to enter into conversation
with strangers. To a solitary individual, a little troop of eight men, all mounted
and well armed, wore a suspicious aspect, so that any intercourse either with
honest men or even banditti, was almost impossible.
Glenarvan was regretting this exceedingly, when he unexpectedly met with
a singular justification of his rendering of the eventful document.
In pursuing the course the travelers had laid down for themselves, they had
several times crossed the routes over the plains in common use, but had struck
into none of them. Hitherto Thalcave had made no remark about this. He
understood quite well, however, that they were not bound for any particular
town, or village, or settlement. Every morning they set out in a straight line
toward the rising sun, and went on without the least deviation. Moreover, it
must have struck Thalcave that instead of being the guide he was guided; yet,
with true Indian reserve, he maintained absolute silence. But on reaching a
particular point, he checked his horse suddenly, and said to Paganel:
“The Carmen route.”
“Yes, my good Patagonian,” replied Paganel in his best Spanish; “the route
from Carmen to Mendoza.”
“We are not going to take it?”
“No,” replied Paganel.
“Where are we going then?”
“Always to the east.”
“That’s going nowhere.”
“Who knows?”
Thalcave was silent, and gazed at the geographer with an air of profound
surprise. He had no suspicion that Paganel was joking, for an Indian is always
grave.
“You are not going to Carmen, then?” he added, after a moment’s pause.
“No.”
“Nor to Mendoza?”
“No, nor to Mendoza.”
Just then Glenarvan came up to ask the reason of the stoppage, and what he
and Thalcave were discussing.
“He wanted to know whether we were going to Carmen or Mendoza, and
was very much surprised at my negative reply to both questions.”
“Well, certainly, it must seem strange to him.”
“I think so. He says we are going nowhere.”
“Well, Paganel, I wonder if it is possible to make him understand the
object of our expedition, and what our motive is for always going east.”
“That would be a difficult matter, for an Indian knows nothing about
degrees, and the finding of the document would appear to him a mere fantastic
story.”
“Is it the story he would not understand, or the storyteller?” said McNabbs,
quietly.
“Ah, McNabbs, I see you have small faith in my Spanish yet.”
“Well, try it, my good friend.”
“So I will.”
And turning round to the Patagonian he began his narrative, breaking down
frequently for the want of a word, and the difficulty of making certain details
intelligible to a half-civilized Indian. It was quite a sight to see the learned
geographer. He gesticulated and articulated, and so worked himself up over it,
that the big drops of sweat fell in a cascade down his forehead on to his chest.
When his tongue failed, his arms were called to aid. Paganel got down on the
ground and traced a geographical map on the sand, showing where the lines of
latitude and longitude cross and where the two oceans were, along which the
Carmen route led. Thalcave looked on composedly, without giving any
indication of comprehending or not comprehending.
The lesson had lasted half an hour, when the geographer left off, wiped his
streaming face, and waited for the Patagonian to speak.
“Does he understand?” said Glenarvan.
“That remains to be seen; but if he doesn’t, I give it up,” replied Paganel.
Thalcave neither stirred nor spoke. His eyes remained fixed on the lines
drawn on the sand, now becoming fast effaced by the wind.
“Well?” said Paganel to him at length.
The Patagonian seemed not to hear. Paganel fancied he could detect an
ironical smile already on the lips of the Major, and determined to carry the
day, was about to recommence his geographical illustrations, when the Indian
stopped him by a gesture, and said:
“You are in search of a prisoner?”
“Yes,” replied Paganel.
“And just on this line between the setting and rising sun?” added Thalcave,
speaking in Indian fashion of the route from west to east.
“Yes, yes, that’s it.”
“And it’s your God,” continued the guide, “that has sent you the secret of
this prisoner on the waves.”
“God himself.”
“His will be accomplished then,” replied the native almost solemnly. “We
will march east, and if it needs be, to the sun.”
Paganel, triumphing in his pupil, immediately translated his replies to his
companions, and exclaimed:
“What an intelligent race! All my explanations would have been lost on
nineteen in every twenty of the peasants in my own country.”
Glenarvan requested him to ask the Patagonian if he had heard of any
foreigners who had fallen into the hands of the Indians of the Pampas.
Paganel did so, and waited an answer.
“Perhaps I have.”
The reply was no sooner translated than the Patagonian found himself
surrounded by the seven men questioning him with eager glances. Paganel was
so excited, he could hardly find words, and he gazed at the grave Indian as if
he could read the reply on his lips.
Each word spoken by Thalcave was instantly translated, so that the whole
party seemed to hear him speak in their mother tongue.
“And what about the prisoner?” asked Paganel.
“He was a foreigner.”
“You have seen him?”
“No; but I have heard the Indian speak of him. He is brave; he has the heart
of a bull.”
“The heart of a bull!” said Paganel. “Ah, this magnificent Patagonian
language. You understand him, my friends, he means a courageous man.”
“My father!” exclaimed Robert Grant, and, turning to Paganel, he asked
what the Spanish was for, “Is it my father.”
“Es mio padre,” replied the geographer.
Immediately taking Thalcave’s hands in his own, the boy said, in a soft
tone:
“Es mio padre.”
“Suo padre,” replied the Patagonian, his face lighting up.
He took the child in his arms, lifted him up on his horse, and gazed at him
with peculiar sympathy. His intelligent face was full of quiet feeling.
But Paganel had not completed his interrogations. “This prisoner, who was
he? What was he doing? When had Thalcave heard of him?” All these
questions poured upon him at once.
He had not long to wait for an answer, and learned that the European was a
slave in one of the tribes that roamed the country between the Colorado and
the Rio Negro.
“But where was the last place he was in?”
“With the Cacique Calfoucoura.”
“In the line we have been following?”
“Yes.”
“And who is this Cacique?”
“The chief of the Poyuches Indians, a man with two tongues and two
hearts.”
“That’s to say false in speech and false in action,” said Paganel, after he
had translated this beautiful figure of the Patagonian language.
“And can we deliver our friend?” he added.
“You may if he is still in the hands of the Indians.”
“And when did you last hear of him?”
“A long while ago; the sun has brought two summers since then to the
Pampas.”
The joy of Glenarvan can not be described. This reply agreed perfectly
with the date of the document. But one question still remained for him to put
to Thalcave.
“You spoke of a prisoner,” he said; “but were there not three?”
“I don’t know,” said Thalcave.
“And you know nothing of his present situation?”
“Nothing.”
This ended the conversation. It was quite possible that the three men had
become separated long ago; but still this much was certain, that the Indians
had spoken of a European that was in their power; and the date of the
captivity, and even the descriptive phrase about the captive, evidently pointed
to Harry Grant.
CHAPTER XVII A SERIOUS NECESSITY
The Argentine Pampas extend from the thirty-fourth to the fortieth degree
of southern latitude. The word PAMPA, of Araucanian origin, signifies grass
plain, and justly applies to the whole region. The mimosas growing on the
western part, and the substantial herbage on the eastern, give those plains a
peculiar appearance. The soil is composed of sand and red or yellow clay, and
this is covered by a layer of earth, in which the vegetation takes root. The
geologist would find rich treasures in the tertiary strata here, for it is full of
antediluvian remains—enormous bones, which the Indians attribute to some
gigantic race that lived in a past age.
The horses went on at a good pace through the thick PAJA-BRAVA, the
grass of the Pampas, par excellence, so high and thick that the Indians find
shelter in it from storms. At certain distances, but increasingly seldom, there
were wet, marshy spots, almost entirely under water, where the willows grew,
and a plant called the Gygnerium argenteum. Here the horses drank their fill
greedily, as if bent on quenching their thirst for past, present and future.
Thalcave went first to beat the bushes and frighten away the cholinas, a most
dangerous species of viper, the bite of which kills an ox in less than an hour.
For two days they plodded steadily across this arid and deserted plain. The
dry heat became severe. There were not only no RIOS, but even the ponds dug
out by the Indians were dried up. As the drought seemed to increase with
every mile, Paganel asked Thalcave when he expected to come to water.
“At Lake Salinas,” replied the Indian.
“And when shall we get there?”
“To-morrow evening.”
When the Argentines travel in the Pampas they generally dig wells, and
find water a few feet below the surface. But the travelers could not fall back
on this resource, not having the necessary implements. They were therefore
obliged to husband the small provision of water they had still left, and deal it
out in rations, so that if no one had enough to satisfy his thirst no one felt it too
painful.
They halted at evening after a course of thirty miles and eagerly looked
forward to a good night’s rest to compensate for the fatigue of day. But their
slumbers were invaded by a swarm of mosquitoes, which allowed them no
peace. Their presence indicated a change of wind which shifted to the north. A
south or southwest wind generally puts to flight these little pests.
Even these petty ills of life could not ruffle the Major’s equanimity; but
Paganel, on the contrary, was perfectly exasperated by such trifling
annoyances. He abused the poor mosquitoes desperately, and deplored the lack
of some acid lotion which would have eased the pain of their stings. The
Major did his best to console him by reminding him of the fact that they had
only to do with one species of insect, among the 300,000 naturalists reckon.
He would listen to nothing, and got up in a very bad temper.
He was quite willing to start at daybreak, however, for they had to get to
Lake Salinas before sundown. The horses were tired out and dying for water,
and though their riders had stinted themselves for their sakes, still their ration
was very insufficient. The drought was constantly increasing, and the heat
none the less for the wind being north, this wind being the simoom of the
Pampas.
There was a brief interruption this day to the monotony of the journey.
Mulrady, who was in front of the others, rode hastily back to report the
approach of a troop of Indians. The news was received with very different
feelings by Glenarvan and Thalcave. The Scotchman was glad of the chance
of gleaning some information about his shipwrecked countryman, while the
Patagonian hardly cared to encounter the nomadic Indians of the prairie,
knowing their bandit propensities. He rather sought to avoid them, and gave
orders to his party to have their arms in readiness for any trouble.
Presently the nomads came in sight, and the Patagonian was reassured at
finding they were only ten in number. They came within a hundred yards of
them, and stopped. This was near enough to observe them distinctly. They
were fine specimens of the native races, which had been almost entirely swept
away in 1833 by General Rosas, tall in stature, with arched forehead and olive
complexion. They were dressed in guanaco skins, and carried lances twenty
feet long, knives, slings, bolas, and lassos, and, by their dexterity in the
management of their horses, showed themselves to be accomplished riders.
They appeared to have stopped for the purpose of holding a council with
each other, for they shouted and gesticulated at a great rate. Glenarvan
determined to go up to them; but he had no sooner moved forward than the
whole band wheeled round, and disappeared with incredible speed. It would
have been useless for the travelers to attempt to overtake them with such
wornout horses.
“The cowards!” exclaimed Paganel.
“They scampered off too quick for honest folks,” said McNabbs.
“Who are these Indians, Thalcave?” asked Paganel.
“Gauchos.”
“The Gauchos!” cried Paganel; and, turning to his companions, he added,
“we need not have been so much on our guard; there was nothing to fear.”
“How is that?” asked McNabbs.
“Because the Gauchos are inoffensive peasants.”
“You believe that, Paganel?”
“Certainly I do. They took us for robbers, and fled in terror.”
“I rather think they did not dare to attack us,” replied Glenarvan, much
vexed at not being able to enter into some sort of communication with those
Indians, whatever they were.
“That’s my opinion too,” said the Major, “for if I am not mistaken, instead
of being harmless, the Gauchos are formidable out-and-out bandits.”
“The idea!” exclaimed Paganel.
And forthwith commenced a lively discussion of this ethnological thesis—
so lively that the Major became excited, and, quite contrary to his usual
suavity, said bluntly:
“I believe you are wrong, Paganel.”
“Wrong?” replied Paganel.
“Yes. Thalcave took them for robbers, and he knows what he is talking
about.”
“Well, Thalcave was mistaken this time,” retorted Paganel, somewhat
sharply. “The Gauchos are agriculturists and shepherds, and nothing else, as I
have stated in a pamphlet on the natives of the Pampas, written by me, which
has attracted some notice.”
“Well, well, you have committed an error, that’s all, Monsieur Paganel.”
“What, Monsieur McNabbs! you tell me I have committed an error?”
“An inadvertence, if you like, which you can put among the ERRATA in
the next edition.”
Paganel, highly incensed at his geographical knowledge being brought in
question, and even jested about, allowed his ill-humor to get the better of him,
and said:
“Know, sir, that my books have no need of such ERRATA.”
“Indeed! Well, on this occasion they have, at any rate,” retorted McNabbs,
quite as obstinate as his opponent.
“Sir, I think you are very annoying to-day.”
“And I think you are very crabbed.”
Glenarvan thought it was high time to interfere, for the discussion was
getting too hot, so he said:
“Come, now, there is no doubt one of you is very teasing and the other is
very crabbed, and I must say I am surprised at both of you.”
The Patagonian, without understanding the cause, could see that the two
friends were quarreling. He began to smile, and said quietly:
“It’s the north wind.”
“The north wind,” exclaimed Paganel; “what’s the north wind to do with
it?”
“Ah, it is just that,” said Glenarvan. “It’s the north wind that has put you in
a bad temper. I have heard that, in South America, the wind greatly irritates
the nervous system.”
“By St. Patrick, Edward you are right,” said the Major, laughing heartily.
But Paganel, in a towering rage, would not give up the contest, and turned
upon Glenarvan, whose intervention in this jesting manner he resented.
“And so, my Lord, my nervous system is irritated?” he said.
“Yes, Paganel, it is the north wind—a wind which causes many a crime in
the Pampas, as the TRAMONTANE does in the Campagna of Rome.”
“Crimes!” returned the geographer. “Do I look like a man that would
commit crimes?”
“That’s not exactly what I said.”
“Tell me at once that I want to assassinate you?”
“Well, I am really afraid,” replied Glenarvan, bursting into an
uncontrollable fit of laughter, in which all others joined.
Paganel said no more, but went off in front alone, and came back in a few
minutes quite himself, as if he had completely forgotten his grievance.
At eight o’clock in the evening, Thalcave, who was considerably in
advance of the rest, descried in the distance the much-desired lake, and in less
than a quarter of an hour they reached its banks; but a grievous disappointment
awaited them—the lake was dried up.
CHAPTER XVIII IN SEARCH OF WATER
Lake Salinas ends the string of lagoons connected with the Sierras Ventana
and Guamini. Numerous expeditions were formerly made there from Buenos
Ayres, to collect the salt deposited on its banks, as the waters contain great
quantities of chloride of sodium.
But when Thalcave spoke of the lake as supplying drinkable water he was
thinking of the RIOS of fresh water which run into it. Those streams, however,
were all dried up also; the burning sun had drunk up every thing liquid, and
the consternation of the travelers may be imagined at the discovery.
Some action must be taken immediately, however; for what little water still
remained was almost bad, and could not quench thirst. Hunger and fatigue
were forgotten in the face of this imperious necessity. A sort of leather tent,
called a ROUKAH, which had been left by the natives, afforded the party a
temporary resting-place, and the weary horses stretched themselves along the
muddy banks, and tried to browse on the marine plants and dry reeds they
found there—nauseous to the taste as they must have been.
As soon as the whole party were ensconced in the ROUKAH, Paganel
asked Thalcave what he thought was best to be done. A rapid conversation
followed, a few words of which were intelligible to Glenarvan. Thalcave
spoke calmly, but the lively Frenchman gesticulated enough for both. After a
little, Thalcave sat silent and folded his arms.
“What does he say?” asked Glenarvan. “I fancied he was advising us to
separate.”
“Yes, into two parties. Those of us whose horses are so done out with
fatigue and thirst that they can scarcely drag one leg after the other, are to
continue the route as they best can, while the others, whose steeds are fresher,
are to push on in advance toward the river Guamini, which throws itself into
Lake San Lucas about thirty-one miles off. If there should be water enough in
the river, they are to wait on the banks till their companions reach them; but
should it be dried up, they will hasten back and spare them a useless journey.”
“And what will we do then?” asked Austin.
“Then we shall have to make up our minds to go seventy-two miles south,
as far as the commencement of the Sierra Ventana, where rivers abound.”
“It is wise counsel, and we will act upon it without loss of time. My horse
is in tolerable good trim, and I volunteer to accompany Thalcave.”
“Oh, my Lord, take me,” said Robert, as if it were a question of some
pleasure party.
“But would you be able for it, my boy?”
“Oh, I have a fine beast, which just wants to have a gallop. Please, my
Lord, to take me.”
“Come, then, my boy,” said Glenarvan, delighted not to leave Robert
behind. “If we three don’t manage to find out fresh water somewhere,” he
added, “we must be very stupid.”
“Well, well, and what about me?” said Paganel.
“Oh, my dear Paganel, you must stay with the reserve corps,” replied the
Major. “You are too well acquainted with the 37th parallel and the river
Guamini and the whole Pampas for us to let you go. Neither Mulrady, nor
Wilson, nor myself would be able to rejoin Thalcave at the given rendezvous,
but we will put ourselves under the banner of the brave Jacques Paganel with
perfect confidence.”
“I resign myself,” said the geographer, much flattered at having supreme
command.
“But mind, Paganel, no distractions,” added the Major. “Don’t you take us
to the wrong place—to the borders of the Pacific, for instance.”
“Oh, you insufferable Major; it would serve you right,” replied Paganel,
laughing. “But how will you manage to understand what Thalcave says,
Glenarvan?” he continued.
“I suppose,” replied Glenarvan, “the Patagonian and I won’t have much to
talk about; besides, I know a few Spanish words, and, at a pinch, I should not
fear either making him understand me, or my understanding him.”
“Go, then, my worthy friend,” said Paganel.
“We’ll have supper first,” rejoined Glenarvan, “and then sleep, if we can,
till it is starting time.”
The supper was not very reviving without drink of any kind, and they tried
to make up for the lack of it by a good sleep. But Paganel dreamed of water all
night, of torrents and cascades, and rivers and ponds, and streams and brooks
—in fact, he had a complete nightmare.
Next morning, at six o’clock, the horses of Thalcave, Glenarvan and
Robert were got ready. Their last ration of water was given them, and drunk
with more avidity than satisfaction, for it was filthy, disgusting stuff. The three
travelers then jumped into their saddles, and set off, shouting “Au revoir!” to
their companions.
“Don’t come back whatever you do,” called Paganel after them.
The Desertio de las Salinas, which they had to traverse, is a dry plain,
covered with stunted trees not above ten feet high, and small mimosas, which
the Indians call curra-mammel; and JUMES, a bushy shrub, rich in soda. Here
and there large spaces were covered with salt, which sparkled in the sunlight
with astonishing brilliancy. These might easily have been taken for sheets of
ice, had not the intense heat forbidden the illusion; and the contrast these
dazzling white sheets presented to the dry, burned-up ground gave the desert a
most peculiar character. Eighty miles south, on the contrary, the Sierra
Ventana, toward which the travelers might possibly have to betake themselves
should the Guamini disappoint their hopes, the landscape was totally different.
There the fertility is splendid; the pasturage is incomparable. Unfortunately, to
reach them would necessitate a march of one hundred and thirty miles south;
and this was why Thalcave thought it best to go first to Guamini, as it was not
only much nearer, but also on the direct line of route.
The three horses went forward might and main, as if instinctively knowing
whither they were bound. Thaouka especially displayed a courage that neither
fatigue nor hunger could damp. He bounded like a bird over the dried-up
CANADAS and the bushes of CURRA-MAMMEL, his loud, joyous neighing
seeming to bode success to the search. The horses of Glenarvan and Robert,
though not so light-footed, felt the spur of his example, and followed him
bravely. Thalcave inspirited his companions as much as Thaouka did his fourfooted brethren. He sat motionless in the saddle, but often turned his head to
look at Robert, and ever and anon gave him a shout of encouragement and
approval, as he saw how well he rode. Certainly the boy deserved praise, for
he was fast becoming an excellent cavalier.
“Bravo! Robert,” said Glenarvan. “Thalcave is evidently congratulating
you, my boy, and paying you compliments.”
“What for, my Lord?”
“For your good horsemanship.”
“I can hold firm on, that’s all,” replied Robert blushing with pleasure at
such an encomium.
“That is the principal thing, Robert; but you are too modest. I tell you that
some day you will turn out an accomplished horseman.”
“What would papa say to that?” said Robert, laughing. “He wants me to be
a sailor.”
“The one won’t hinder the other. If all cavaliers wouldn’t make good
sailors, there is no reason why all sailors should not make good horsemen. To
keep one’s footing on the yards must teach a man to hold on firm; and as to
managing the reins, and making a horse go through all sorts of movements,
that’s easily acquired. Indeed, it comes naturally.”
“Poor father,” said Robert; “how he will thank you for saving his life.”
“You love him very much, Robert?”
“Yes, my Lord, dearly. He was so good to me and my sister. We were his
only thought: and whenever he came home from his voyages, we were sure of
some SOUVENIR from all the places he had been to; and, better still, of
loving words and caresses. Ah! if you knew him you would love him, too.
Mary is most like him. He has a soft voice, like hers. That’s strange for a
sailor, isn’t it?”
“Yes, Robert, very strange.”
“I see him still,” the boy went on, as if speaking to himself. “Good, brave
papa. He put me to sleep on his knee, crooning an old Scotch ballad about the
lochs of our country. The time sometimes comes back to me, but very
confused like. So it does to Mary, too. Ah, my Lord, how we loved him. Well,
I do think one needs to be little to love one’s father like that.”
“Yes, and to be grown up, my child, to venerate him,” replied Glenarvan,
deeply touched by the boy’s genuine affection.
During this conversation the horses had been slackening speed, and were
only walking now.
“You will find him?” said Robert again, after a few minutes’silence.
“Yes, we’ll find him,” was Glenarvan’s reply, “Thalcave has set us on the
track, and I have great confidence in him.”
“Thalcave is a brave Indian, isn’t he?” said the boy.
“That indeed he is.”
“Do you know something, my Lord?”
“What is it, and then I will tell you?”
“That all the people you have with you are brave. Lady Helena, whom I
love so, and the Major, with his calm manner, and Captain Mangles, and
Monsieur Paganel, and all the sailors on the DUNCAN. How courageous and
devoted they are.”
“Yes, my boy, I know that,” replied Glenarvan.
“And do you know that you are the best of all.”
“No, most certainly I don’t know that.”
“Well, it is time you did, my Lord,” said the boy, seizing his lordship’s
hand, and covering it with kisses.
Glenarvan shook his head, but said no more, as a gesture from Thalcave
made them spur on their horses and hurry forward.
But it was soon evident that, with the exception of Thaouka, the wearied
animals could not go quicker than a walking pace. At noon they were obliged
to let them rest for an hour. They could not go on at all, and refused to eat the
ALFAFARES, a poor, burnt-up sort of lucerne that grew there.
Glenarvan began to be uneasy. Tokens of sterility were not the least on the
decrease, and the want of water might involve serious calamities. Thalcave
said nothing, thinking probably, that it would be time enough to despair if the
Guamini should be dried up—if, indeed, the heart of an Indian can ever
despair.
Spur and whip had both to be employed to induce the poor animals to
resume the route, and then they only crept along, for their strength was gone.
Thaouka, indeed, could have galloped swiftly enough, and reached the RIO
in a few hours, but Thalcave would not leave his companions behind, alone in
the midst of a desert.
It was hard work, however, to get the animal to consent to walk quietly. He
kicked, and reared, and neighed violently, and was subdued at last more by his
master’s voice than hand. Thalcave positively talked to the beast, and Thaouka
understood perfectly, though unable to reply, for, after a great deal of arguing,
the noble creature yielded, though he still champed the bit.
Thalcave did not understand Thaouka, it turned out, though Thaouka
understood him. The intelligent animal felt humidity in the atmosphere and
drank it in with frenzy, moving and making a noise with his tongue, as if
taking deep draughts of some cool refreshing liquid. The Patagonian could not
mistake him now—water was not far off.
The two other horses seemed to catch their comrade’s meaning, and,
inspired by his example, made a last effort, and galloped forward after the
Indian.
About three o’clock a white line appeared in a dip of the road, and seemed
to tremble in the sunlight.
“Water!” exclaimed Glenarvan.
“Yes, yes! it is water!” shouted Robert.
They were right; and the horses knew it too, for there was no need now to
urge them on; they tore over the ground as if mad, and in a few minutes had
reached the river, and plunged in up to their chests.
Their masters had to go on too, whether they would or not but they were so
rejoiced at being able to quench their thirst, that this compulsory bath was no
grievance.
“Oh, how delicious this is!” exclaimed Robert, taking a deep draught.
“Drink moderately, my boy,” said Glenarvan; but he did not set the
example.
Thalcave drank very quietly, without hurrying himself, taking small gulps,
but “as long as a lazo,” as the Patagonians say. He seemed as if he were never
going to leave off, and really there was some danger of his swallowing up the
whole river.
At last Glenarvan said:
“Well, our friends won’t be disappointed this time; they will be sure of
finding clear, cool water when they get here—that is to say, if Thalcave leaves
any for them.”
“But couldn’t we go to meet them? It would spare them several hours’
suffering and anxiety.”
“You’re right my boy; but how could we carry them this water? The
leather bottles were left with Wilson. No; it is better for us to wait for them as
we agreed. They can’t be here till about the middle of the night, so the best
thing we can do is to get a good bed and a good supper ready for them.”
Thalcave had not waited for Glenarvan’s proposition to prepare an
encampment. He had been fortunate enough to discover on the banks of the rio
a ramada, a sort of enclosure, which had served as a fold for flocks, and was
shut in on three sides. A more suitable place could not be found for their
night’s lodging, provided they had no fear of sleeping in the open air beneath
the star-lit heavens; and none of Thalcave’s companions had much solicitude
on that score. Accordingly they took possession at once, and stretched
themselves at full length on the ground in the bright sunshine, to dry their
dripping garments.
“Well, now we’ve secured a lodging, we must think of supper,” said
Glenarvan. “Our friends must not have reason to complain of the couriers they
sent to precede them; and if I am not much mistaken, they will be very
satisfied. It strikes me that an hour’s shooting won’t be lost time. Are you
ready, Robert?”
“Yes, my Lord,” replied the boy, standing up, gun in hand.
Why Glenarvan proposed this was, that the banks of the Guamini seemed
to be the general rendezvous of all the game in the surrounding plains. A sort
of partridge peculiar to the Pampas, called TINAMOUS; black wood-hens; a
species of plover, called TERU-TERU; yellow rays, and waterfowl with
magnificent green plumage, rose in coveys. No quadrupeds, however, were
visible, but Thalcave pointed to the long grass and thick brushwood, and gave
his friends to understand they were lying there in concealment.
Disdaining the feathered tribes when more substantial game was at hand,
the hunters’ first shots were fired into the underwood. Instantly there rose by
the hundred roebucks and guanacos, like those that had swept over them that
terrible night on the Cordilleras, but the timid creatures were so frightened that
they were all out of gunshot in a twinkling. The hunters were obliged to
content themselves with humbler game, though in an alimentary point of view
nothing better could be wished. A dozen of red partridges and rays were
speedily brought down, and Glenarvan also managed very cleverly to kill a
TAY-TETRE, or peccary, a pachydermatous animal, the flesh of which is
excellent eating.
In less than half an hour the hunters had all the game they required. Robert
had killed a curious animal belonging to the order EDENTATA, an armadillo,
a sort of tatou, covered with a hard bony shell, in movable pieces, and
measuring a foot and a half long. It was very fat and would make an excellent
dish, the Patagonian said. Robert was very proud of his success.
Thalcave did his part by capturing a NANDOU, a species of ostrich,
remarkable for its extreme swiftness.
There could be no entrapping such an animal, and the Indian did not
attempt it. He urged Thaouka to a gallop, and made a direct attack, knowing
that if the first aim missed the NANDOU would soon tire out horse and rider
by involving them in an inextricable labyrinth of windings. The moment,
therefore, that Thalcave got to a right distance, he flung his BOLAS with such
a powerful hand, and so skillfully, that he caught the bird round the legs and
paralyzed his efforts at once. In a few seconds it lay flat on the ground.
The Indian had not made his capture for the mere pleasure and glory of
such a novel chase. The flesh of the NANDOU is highly esteemed, and
Thalcave felt bound to contribute his share of the common repast.
They returned to the RAMADA, bringing back the string of partridges, the
ostrich, the peccary, and the armadillo. The ostrich and the peccary were
prepared for cooking by divesting them of their tough skins, and cutting them
up into thin slices. As to the armadillo, he carries his cooking apparatus with
him, and all that had to be done was to place him in his own shell over the
glowing embers.
The substantial dishes were reserved for the night-comers, and the three
hunters contented themselves with devouring the partridges, and washed down
their meal with clear, fresh water, which was pronounced superior to all the
porter in the world, even to the famous Highland USQUEBAUGH, or whisky.
The horses had not been overlooked. A large quantity of dry fodder was
discovered lying heaped up in the RAMADA, and this supplied them amply
with both food and bedding.
When all was ready the three companions wrapped themselves in the
ponchos, and stretched themselves on an eiderdown of ALFAFARES, the
usual bed of hunters on the Pampas.
CHAPTER XIX THE RED WOLVES
Night came, but the orb of night was invisible to the inhabitants of the
earth, for she was just in her first quarter. The dim light of the stars was all that
illumined the plain. The waters of the Guamini ran silently, like a sheet of oil
over a surface of marble. Birds, quadrupeds, and reptiles were resting
motionless after the fatigues of the day, and the silence of the desert brooded
over the far-spreading Pampas.
Glenarvan, Robert, and Thalcave, had followed the common example, and
lay in profound slumber on their soft couch of lucerne. The worn-out horses
had stretched themselves full length on the ground, except Thaouka, who slept
standing, true to his high blood, proud in repose as in action, and ready to start
at his master’s call. Absolute silence reigned within the inclosure, over which
the dying embers of the fire shed a fitful light.
However, the Indian’s sleep did not last long; for about ten o’clock he
woke, sat up, and turned his ear toward the plain, listening intently, with halfclosed eyes. An uneasy look began to depict itself on his usually impassive
face. Had he caught scent of some party of Indian marauders, or of jaguars,
water tigers, and other terrible animals that haunt the neighborhood of rivers?
Apparently it was the latter, for he threw a rapid glance on the combustible
materials heaped up in the inclosure, and the expression of anxiety on his
countenance seemed to deepen. This was not surprising, as the whole pile of
ALFAFARES would soon burn out and could only ward off the attacks of wild
beasts for a brief interval.
There was nothing to be done in the circumstances but wait; and wait he
did, in a half-recumbent posture, his head leaning on his hands, and his elbows
on his knees, like a man roused suddenly from his night’s sleep.
A whole hour passed, and anyone except Thalcave would have lain down
again on his couch, reassured by the silence round him. But where a stranger
would have suspected nothing, the sharpened senses of the Indian detected the
approach of danger.
As he was thus watching and listening, Thaouka gave a low neigh, and
stretched his nostrils toward the entrance of the RAMADA.
This startled the Patagonian, and made him rise to his feet at once.
“Thaouka scents an enemy,” he said to himself, going toward the opening,
to make careful survey of the plains.
Silence still prevailed, but not tranquillity; for Thalcave caught a glimpse
of shadows moving noiselessly over the tufts of CURRA-MAMMEL. Here
and there luminous spots appeared, dying out and rekindling constantly, in all
directions, like fantastic lights dancing over the surface of an immense lagoon.
An inexperienced eye might have mistaken them for fireflies, which shine at
night in many parts of the Pampas; but Thalcave was not deceived; he knew
the enemies he had to deal with, and lost no time in loading his carbine and
taking up his post in front of the fence.
He did not wait long, for a strange cry—a confused sound of barking and
howling—broke over the Pampas, followed next instant by the report of the
carbine, which made the uproar a hundred times worse.
Glenarvan and Robert woke in alarm, and started to their feet instantly.
“What is it?” exclaimed Robert.
“Is it the Indians?” asked Glenarvan.
“No,” replied Thalcave, “the AGUARAS.”
“AGUARAS?” said Robert, looking inquiringly at Glenarvan.
“Yes,” replied Glenarvan, “the red wolves of the Pampas.”
They seized their weapons at once, and stationed themselves beside the
Patagonian, who pointed toward the plain from whence the yelling resounded.
Robert drew back involuntarily.
“You are not afraid of wolves, my boy?” said Glenarvan.
“No, my Lord,” said the lad in a firm tone, “and moreover, beside you I am
afraid of nothing.”
“So much the better. These AGUARAS are not very formidable either; and
if it were not for their number I should not give them a thought.”
“Never mind; we are all well armed; let them come.”
“We’ll certainly give them a warm reception,” rejoined Glenarvan.
His Lordship only spoke thus to reassure the child, for a secret terror filled
him at the sight of this legion of bloodthirsty animals let loose on them at
midnight.
There might possibly be some hundreds, and what could three men do,
even armed to the teeth, against such a multitude?
As soon as Thalcave said the word AGUARA, Glenarvan knew that he
meant the red wolf, for this is the name given to it by the Pampas Indians. This
voracious animal, called by naturalists the Canis jubatus, is in shape like a
large dog, and has the head of a fox. Its fur is a reddish-cinnamon color, and
there is a black mane all down the back. It is a strong, nimble animal,
generally inhabiting marshy places, and pursuing aquatic animals by
swimming, prowling about by night and sleeping during the day. Its attacks are
particularly dreaded at the ESTANCIAS, or sheep stations, as it often commits
considerable ravages, carrying off the finest of the flock. Singly, the
AGUARA is not much to be feared; but they generally go in immense packs,
and one had better have to deal with a jaguar or cougar than with them.
Both from the noise of the howling and the multitude of shadows leaping
about, Glenarvan had a pretty good idea of the number of the wolves, and he
knew they had scented a good meal of human flesh or horse flesh, and none of
them would go back to their dens without a share. It was certainly a very
alarming situation to be in.
The assailants were gradually drawing closer. The horses displayed signs
of the liveliest terror, with the exception of Thaouka, who stamped his foot,
and tried to break loose and get out. His master could only calm him by
keeping up a low, continuous whistle.
Glenarvan and Robert had posted themselves so as to defend the opening
of the RAMADA. They were just going to fire into the nearest ranks of the
wolves when Thalcave lowered their weapons.
“What does Thalcave mean?” asked Robert.
“He forbids our firing.”
“And why?”
“Perhaps he thinks it is not the right time.”
But this was not the Indian’s reason, and so Glenarvan saw when he lifted
the powder-flask, showed him it was nearly empty.
“What’s wrong?” asked Robert.
“We must husband our ammunition,” was the reply. “To-day’s shooting has
cost us dear, and we are short of powder and shot. We can’t fire more than
twenty times.”
The boy made no reply, and Glenarvan asked him if he was frightened.
“No, my Lord,” he said.
“That’s right,” returned Glenarvan.
A fresh report resounded that instant. Thalcave had made short work of one
assailant more audacious than the rest, and the infuriated pack had retreated to
within a hundred steps of the inclosure.
On a sign from the Indian Glenarvan took his place, while Thalcave went
back into the inclosure and gathered up all the dried grass and ALFAFARES,
and, indeed, all the combustibles he could rake together, and made a pile of
them at the entrance. Into this he flung one of the still-glowing embers, and
soon the bright flames shot up into the dark night. Glenarvan could now get a
good glimpse of his antagonists, and saw that it was impossible to exaggerate
their numbers or their fury. The barrier of fire just raised by Thalcave had
redoubled their anger, though it had cut off their approach. Several of them,
however, urged on by the hindmost ranks, pushed forward into the very
flames, and burned their paws for their pains.
From time to time another shot had to be fired, notwithstanding the fire, to
keep off the howling pack, and in the course of an hour fifteen dead animals
lay stretched on the prairie.
The situation of the besieged was, relatively speaking, less dangerous now.
As long as the powder lasted and the barrier of fire burned on, there was no
fear of being overmastered. But what was to be done afterward, when both
means of defense failed at once?
Glenarvan’s heart swelled as he looked at Robert. He forgot himself in
thinking of this poor child, as he saw him showing a courage so far above his
years. Robert was pale, but he kept his gun steady, and stood with firm foot
ready to meet the attacks of the infuriated wolves.
However, after Glenarvan had calmly surveyed the actual state of affairs,
he determined to bring things to a crisis.
“In an hour’s time,” he said, “we shall neither have powder nor fire. It will
never do to wait till then before we settle what to do.”
Accordingly, he went up to Thalcave, and tried to talk to him by the help of
the few Spanish words his memory could muster, though their conversation
was often interrupted by one or the other having to fire a shot.
It was no easy task for the two men to understand each other, but, most
fortunately, Glenarvan knew a great deal of the peculiarities of the red wolf;
otherwise he could never have interpreted the Indian’s words and gestures.
As it was, fully a quarter of an hour elapsed before he could get any
answer from Thalcave to tell Robert in reply to his inquiry.
“What does he say?”
“He says that at any price we must hold out till daybreak. The AGUARA
only prowls about at night, and goes back to his lair with the first streak of
dawn. It is a cowardly beast, that loves the darkness and dreads the light—an
owl on four feet.”
“Very well, let us defend ourselves, then, till morning.”
“Yes, my boy, and with knife-thrusts, when gun and shots fail.”
Already Thalcave had set the example, for whenever a wolf came too near
the burning pile, the long arm of the Patagonian dashed through the flames and
came out again reddened with blood.
But very soon this means of defense would be at an end. About two
o’clock, Thalcave flung his last armful of combustibles into the fire, and
barely enough powder remained to load a gun five times.
Glenarvan threw a sorrowful glance round him. He thought of the lad
standing there, and of his companions and those left behind, whom he loved so
dearly.
Robert was silent. Perhaps the danger seemed less imminent to his
imagination. But Glenarvan thought for him, and pictured to himself the
horrible fate that seemed to await him inevitably. Quite overcome by his
emotion, he took the child in his arms, and straining him convulsively to his
heart, pressed his lips on his forehead, while tears he could not restrain
streamed down his cheeks.
Robert looked up into his face with a smile, and said, “I am not
frightened.”
“No, my child, no! and you are right. In two hours daybreak will come,
and we shall be saved. Bravo, Thalcave! my brave Patagonian! Bravo!” he
added as the Indian that moment leveled two enormous beasts who
endeavored to leap across the barrier of flames.
But the fire was fast dying out, and the DENOUEMENT of the terrible
drama was approaching. The flames got lower and lower. Once more the
shadows of night fell on the prairie, and the glaring eyes of the wolves glowed
like phosphorescent balls in the darkness. A few minutes longer, and the whole
pack would be in the inclosure.
Thalcave loaded his carbine for the last time, killed one more enormous
monster, and then folded his arms. His head sank on his chest, and he appeared
buried in deep thought. Was he planning some daring, impossible, mad
attempt to repulse the infuriated horde? Glenarvan did not venture to ask.
At this very moment the wolves began to change their tactics. The
deafening howls suddenly ceased: they seemed to be going away. Gloomy
silence spread over the prairie, and made Robert exclaim:
“They’re gone!”
But Thalcave, guessing his meaning, shook his head. He knew they would
never relinquish their sure prey till daybreak made them hasten back to their
dens.
Still, their plan of attack had evidently been altered. They no longer
attempted to force the entrance, but their new maneuvers only heightened the
danger.
They had gone round the RAMADA, as by common consent, and were
trying to get in on the opposite side.
The next minute they heard their claws attacking the moldering wood, and
already formidable paws and hungry, savage jaws had found their way through
the palings. The terrified horses broke loose from their halters and ran about
the inclosure, mad with fear.
Glenarvan put his arms round the young lad, and resolved to defend him as
long as his life held out. Possibly he might have made a useless attempt at
flight when his eye fell on Thalcave.
The Indian had been stalking about the RAMADA like a stag, when he
suddenly stopped short, and going up to his horse, who was trembling with
impatience, began to saddle him with the most scrupulous care, without
forgetting a single strap or buckle. He seemed no longer to disturb himself in
the least about the wolves outside, though their yells had redoubled in
intensity. A dark suspicion crossed Glenarvan’s mind as he watched him.
“He is going to desert us,” he exclaimed at last, as he saw him seize the
reins, as if preparing to mount.
“He! never!” replied Robert. Instead of deserting them, the truth was that
the Indian was going to try and save his friends by sacrificing himself.
Thaouka was ready, and stood champing his bit. He reared up, and his
splendid eyes flashed fire; he understood his master.
But just as the Patagonian caught hold of the horse’s mane, Glenarvan
seized his arm with a convulsive grip, and said, pointing to the open prairie.
“You are going away?”
“Yes,” replied the Indian, understanding his gesture. Then he said a few
words in Spanish, which meant: “Thaouka; good horse; quick; will draw all
the wolves away after him.”
“Oh, Thalcave,” exclaimed Glenarvan.
“Quick, quick!” replied the Indian, while Glenarvan said, in a broken,
agitated voice to Robert:
“Robert, my child, do you hear him? He wants to sacrifice himself for us.
He wants to rush away over the Pampas, and turn off the wolves from us by
attracting them to himself.”
“Friend Thalcave,” returned Robert, throwing himself at the feet of the
Patagonian, “friend Thalcave, don’t leave us!”
“No,” said Glenarvan, “he shall not leave us.”
And turning toward the Indian, he said, pointing to the frightened horses,
“Let us go together.”
“No,” replied Thalcave, catching his meaning. “Bad beasts; frightened;
Thaouka, good horse.”
“Be it so then!” returned Glenarvan. “Thalcave will not leave you, Robert.
He teaches me what I must do. It is for me to go, and for him to stay by you.”
Then seizing Thaouka’s bridle, he said, “I am going, Thalcave, not you.”
“No,” replied the Patagonian quietly.
“I am,” exclaimed Glenarvan, snatching the bridle out of his hands. “I,
myself! Save this boy, Thalcave! I commit him to you.”
Glenarvan was so excited that he mixed up English words with his
Spanish. But what mattered the language at such a terrible moment. A gesture
was enough. The two men understood each other.
However, Thalcave would not give in, and though every instant’s delay but
increased the danger, the discussion continued.
Neither Glenarvan nor Thalcave appeared inclined to yield. The Indian had
dragged his companion towards the entrance of the RAMADA, and showed
him the prairie, making him understand that now was the time when it was
clear from the wolves; but that not a moment was to be lost, for should this
maneuver not succeed, it would only render the situation of those left behind
more desperate, and that he knew his horse well enough to be able to trust his
wonderful lightness and swiftness to save them all. But Glenarvan was blind
and obstinate, and determined to sacrifice himself at all hazards, when
suddenly he felt himself violently pushed back. Thaouka pranced up, and
reared himself bolt upright on his hind legs, and made a bound over the barrier
of fire, while a clear, young voice called out:
“God save you, my lord.”
But before either Thalcave or Glenarvan could get more than a glimpse of
the boy, holding on fast by Thaouka’s mane, he was out of sight.
“Robert! oh you unfortunate boy,” cried Glenarvan.
But even Thalcave did not catch the words, for his voice was drowned in
the frightful uproar made by the wolves, who had dashed off at a tremendous
speed on the track of the horse.
Thalcave and Glenarvan rushed out of the RAMADA. Already the plain
had recovered its tranquillity, and all that could be seen of the red wolves was
a moving line far away in the distant darkness.
Glenarvan sank prostrate on the ground, and clasped his hands
despairingly. He looked at Thalcave, who smiled with his accustomed
calmness, and said:
“Thaouka, good horse. Brave boy. He will save himself!”
“And suppose he falls?” said Glenarvan.
“He’ll not fall.”
But notwithstanding Thalcave’s assurances, poor Glenarvan spent the rest
of the night in torturing anxiety. He seemed quite insensible now to the danger
they had escaped through the departure of the wolves, and would have
hastened immediately after Robert if the Indian had not kept him back by
making him understand the impossibility of their horses overtaking Thaouka;
and also that boy and horse had outdistanced the wolves long since, and that it
would be useless going to look for them till daylight.
At four o’clock morning began to dawn. A pale glimmer appeared in the
horizon, and pearly drops of dew lay thick on the plain and on the tall grass,
already stirred by the breath of day.
The time for starting had arrived.
“Now!” cried Thalcave, “come.”
Glenarvan made no reply, but took Robert’s horse and sprung into the
saddle. Next minute both men were galloping at full speed toward the west, in
the line in which their companions ought to be advancing. They dashed along
at a prodigious rate for a full hour, dreading every minute to come across the
mangled corpse of Robert. Glenarvan had torn the flanks of his horse with his
spurs in his mad haste, when at last gun-shots were heard in the distance at
regular intervals, as if fired as a signal.
“There they are!” exclaimed Glenarvan; and both he and the Indian urged
on their steeds to a still quicker pace, till in a few minutes more they came up
to the little detachment conducted by Paganel. A cry broke from Glenarvan’s
lips, for Robert was there, alive and well, still mounted on the superb
Thaouka, who neighed loudly with delight at the sight of his master.
“Oh, my child, my child!” cried Glenarvan, with indescribable tenderness
in his tone.
Both he and Robert leaped to the ground, and flung themselves into each
other’s arms. Then the Indian hugged the brave boy in his arms.
“He is alive, he is alive,” repeated Glenarvan again and again.
“Yes,” replied Robert; “and thanks to Thaouka.”
This great recognition of his favorite’s services was wholly unexpected by
the Indian, who was talking to him that minute, caressing and speaking to him,
as if human blood flowed in the veins of the proud creature. Then turning to
Paganel, he pointed to Robert, and said, “A brave!” and employing the Indian
metaphor, he added, “his spurs did not tremble!”
But Glenarvan put his arms round the boy and said, “Why wouldn’t you let
me or Thalcave run the risk of this last chance of deliverance, my son?”
“My lord,” replied the boy in tones of gratitude, “wasn’t it my place to do
it? Thalcave has saved my life already, and you—you are going to save my
father.”
CHAPTER XX STRANGE SIGNS
After the first joy of the meeting was over, Paganel and his party, except
perhaps the Major, were only conscious of one feeling—they were dying of
thirst. Most fortunately for them, the Guamini ran not far off, and about seven
in the morning the little troop reached the inclosure on its banks. The precincts
were strewed with the dead wolves, and judging from their numbers, it was
evident how violent the attack must have been, and how desperate the
resistance.
As soon as the travelers had drunk their fill, they began to demolish the
breakfast prepared in the RAMADA, and did ample justice to the
extraordinary viands. The NANDOU fillets were pronounced first-rate, and
the armadillo was delicious.
“To eat moderately,” said Paganel, “would be positive ingratitude to
Providence. We must eat immoderately.”
And so they did, but were none the worse for it. The water of the Guamini
greatly aided digestion apparently.
Glenarvan, however, was not going to imitate Hannibal at Capua, and at
ten o’clock next morning gave the signal for starting. The leathern bottles
were filled with water, and the day’s march commenced. The horses were so
well rested that they were quite fresh again, and kept up a canter almost
constantly. The country was not so parched up now, and consequently less
sterile, but still a desert. No incident occurred of any importance during the 2d
and 3d of November, and in the evening they reached the boundary of the
Pampas, and camped for the night on the frontiers of the province of Buenos
Ayres. Two-thirds of their journey was now accomplished. It was twenty-two
days since they left the Bay of Talcahuano, and they had gone 450 miles.
Next morning they crossed the conventional line which separates the
Argentine plains from the region of the Pampas. It was here that Thalcave
hoped to meet the Caciques, in whose hands, he had no doubt, Harry Grant
and his men were prisoners.
From the time of leaving the Guamini, there was marked change in the
temperature, to the great relief of the travelers. It was much cooler, thanks to
the violent and cold winds from Patagonia, which constantly agitate the
atmospheric waves. Horses and men were glad enough of this, after what they
had suffered from the heat and drought, and they felt animated with fresh
ardor and confidence. But contrary to what Thalcave had said, the whole
district appeared uninhabited, or rather abandoned.
Their route often led past or went right through small lagoons, sometimes
of fresh water, sometimes of brackish. On the banks and bushes about these,
king-wrens were hopping about and larks singing joyously in concert with the
tangaras, the rivals in color of the brilliant humming birds. On the thorny
bushes the nests of the ANNUBIS swung to and fro in the breeze like an
Indian hammock; and on the shore magnificent flamingos stalked in regular
order like soldiers marching, and spread out their flaming red wings. Their
nests were seen in groups of thousands, forming a complete town, about a foot
high, and resembling a truncated cone in shape. The flamingos did not disturb
themselves in the least at the approach of the travelers, but this did not suit
Paganel.
“I have been very desirous a long time,” he said to the Major, “to see a
flamingo flying.”
“All right,” replied McNabbs.
“Now while I have the opportunity, I should like to make the most of it,”
continued Paganel.
“Very well; do it, Paganel.”
“Come with me, then, Major, and you too Robert. I want witnesses.”
And all three went off towards the flamingos, leaving the others to go on in
advance.
As soon as they were near enough, Paganel fired, only loading his gun,
however, with powder, for he would not shed even the blood of a bird
uselessly. The shot made the whole assemblage fly away en masse, while
Paganel watched them attentively through his spectacles.
“Well, did you see them fly?” he asked the Major.
“Certainly I did,” was the reply. “I could not help seeing them, unless I had
been blind.”
“Well and did you think they resembled feathered arrows when they were
flying?”
“Not in the least.”
“Not a bit,” added Robert.
“I was sure of it,” said the geographer, with a satisfied air; “and yet the
very proudest of modest men, my illustrious countryman, Chateaubriand,
made the inaccurate comparison. Oh, Robert, comparison is the most
dangerous figure in rhetoric that I know. Mind you avoid it all your life, and
only employ it in a last extremity.”
“Are you satisfied with your experiment?” asked McNabbs.
“Delighted.”
“And so am I. But we had better push on now, for your illustrious
Chateaubriand has put us more than a mile behind.”
On rejoining their companions, they found Glenarvan busily engaged in
conversation with the Indian, though apparently unable to make him
understand. Thalcave’s gaze was fixed intently on the horizon, and his face
wore a puzzled expression.
The moment Paganel came in sight, Glenarvan called out:
“Come along, friend Paganel. Thalcave and I can’t understand each other
at all.”
After a few minute’s talk with the Patagonian, the interpreter turned to
Glenarvan and said:
“Thalcave is quite astonished at the fact, and certainly it is very strange
that there are no Indians, nor even traces of any to be seen in these plains, for
they are generally thick with companies of them, either driving along cattle
stolen from the ESTANCIAS, or going to the Andes to sell their zorillo cloths
and plaited leather whips.”
“And what does Thalcave think is the reason?”
“He does not know; he is amazed and that’s all.”
“But what description of Indians did he reckon on meeting in this part of
the Pampas?”
“Just the very ones who had the foreign prisoners in their hands, the
natives under the rule of the Caciques Calfoucoura, Catriel, or Yanchetruz.”
“Who are these Caciques?”
“Chiefs that were all powerful thirty years ago, before they were driven
beyond the sierras. Since then they have been reduced to subjection as much
as Indians can be, and they scour the plains of the Pampas and the province of
Buenos Ayres. I quite share Thalcave’s surprise at not discovering any traces
of them in regions which they usually infest as SALTEADORES, or bandits.”
“And what must we do then?”
“I’ll go and ask him,” replied Paganel.
After a brief colloquy he returned and said:
“This is his advice, and very sensible it is, I think. He says we had better
continue our route to the east as far as Fort Independence, and if we don’t get
news of Captain Grant there we shall hear, at any rate, what has become of the
Indians of the Argentine plains.”
“Is Fort Independence far away?” asked Glenarvan.
“No, it is in the Sierra Tandil, a distance of about sixty miles.”
“And when shall we arrive?”
“The day after to-morrow, in the evening.”
Glenarvan was considerably disconcerted by this circumstance. Not to find
an Indian where in general there were only too many, was so unusual that
there must be some grave cause for it; but worse still if Harry Grant were a
prisoner in the hands of any of those tribes, had he been dragged away with
them to the north or south? Glenarvan felt that, cost what it might, they must
not lose his track, and therefore decided to follow the advice of Thalcave, and
go to the village of Tandil. They would find some one there to speak to, at all
events.
About four o’clock in the evening a hill, which seemed a mountain in so
flat a country, was sighted in the distance. This was Sierra Tapalquem, at the
foot of which the travelers camped that night.
The passage in the morning over this sierra, was accomplished without the
slightest difficulty; after having crossed the Cordillera of the Andes, it was
easy work to ascend the gentle heights of such a sierra as this. The horses
scarcely slackened their speed. At noon they passed the deserted fort of
Tapalquem, the first of the chain of forts which defend the southern frontiers
from Indian marauders. But to the increasing surprise of Thalcave, they did
not come across even the shadow of an Indian. About the middle of the day,
however, three flying horsemen, well mounted and well armed came in sight,
gazed at them for an instant, and then sped away with inconceivable rapidity.
Glenarvan was furious.
“Gauchos,” said the Patagonian, designating them by the name which had
caused such a fiery discussion between the Major and Paganel.
“Ah! the Gauchos,” replied McNabbs. “Well, Paganel, the north wind is
not blowing to-day. What do you think of those fellows yonder?”
“I think they look like regular bandits.”
“And how far is it from looking to being, my good geographer?”
“Only just a step, my dear Major.”
Paganel’s admission was received with a general laugh, which did not in
the least disconcert him. He went on talking about the Indians however, and
made this curious observation:
“I have read somewhere,” he said, “that about the Arabs there is a peculiar
expression of ferocity in the mouth, while the eyes have a kindly look. Now, in
these American savages it is quite the reverse, for the eye has a particularly
villainous aspect.”
No physiognomist by profession could have better characterized the Indian
race.
But desolate as the country appeared, Thalcave was on his guard against
surprises, and gave orders to his party to form themselves in a close platoon. It
was a useless precaution, however; for that same evening, they camped for the
night in an immense TOLDERIA, which they not only found perfectly empty,
but which the Patagonian declared, after he had examined it all round, must
have been uninhabited for a long time.
Next day, the first ESTANCIAS of the Sierra Tandil came in sight. The
ESTANCIAS are large cattle stations for breeding cattle; but Thalcave
resolved not to stop at any of them, but to go straight on to Fort Independence.
They passed several farms fortified by battlements and surrounded by a deep
moat, the principal building being encircled by a terrace, from which the
inhabitants could fire down on the marauders in the plain. Glenarvan might,
perhaps, have got some information at these houses, but it was the surest plan
to go straight on to the village of Tandil. Accordingly they went on without
stopping, fording the RIO of Los Huasos and also the Chapaleofu, a few miles
further on. Soon they were treading the grassy slopes of the first ridges of the
Sierra Tandil, and an hour afterward the village appeared in the depths of a
narrow gorge, and above it towered the lofty battlements of Fort
Independence.
CHAPTER XXI A FALSE TRAIL
The Sierra Tandil rises a thousand feet above the level of the sea. It is a
primordial chain—that is to say, anterior to all organic and metamorphic
creation. It is formed of a semi-circular ridge of gneiss hills, covered with fine
short grass. The district of Tandil, to which it has given its name, includes all
the south of the Province of Buenos Ayres, and terminates in a river which
conveys north all the RIOS that take their rise on its slopes.
After making a short ascent up the sierra, they reached the postern gate, so
carelessly guarded by an Argentine sentinel, that they passed through without
difficulty, a circumstance which betokened extreme negligence or extreme
security.
A few minutes afterward the Commandant appeared in person. He was a
vigorous man about fifty years of age, of military aspect, with grayish hair,
and an imperious eye, as far as one could see through the clouds of tobacco
smoke which escaped from his short pipe. His walk reminded Paganel
instantly of the old subalterns in his own country.
Thalcave was spokesman, and addressing the officer, presented Lord
Glenarvan and his companions. While he was speaking, the Commandant kept
staring fixedly at Paganel in rather an embarrassing manner. The geographer
could not understand what he meant by it, and was just about to interrogate
him, when the Commandant came forward, and seizing both his hands in the
most free-and-easy fashion, said in a joyous voice, in the mother tongue of the
geographer:
“A Frenchman!”
“Yes, a Frenchman,” replied Paganel.
“Ah! delightful! Welcome, welcome. I am a Frenchman too,” he added,
shaking Paganel’s hand with such vigor as to be almost alarming.
“Is he a friend of yours, Paganel?” asked the Major.
“Yes,” said Paganel, somewhat proudly. “One has friends in every division
of the globe.”
After he had succeeded in disengaging his hand, though not without
difficulty, from the living vise in which it was held, a lively conversation
ensued. Glenarvan would fain have put in a word about the business on hand,
but the Commandant related his entire history, and was not in a mood to stop
till he had done. It was evident that the worthy man must have left his native
country many years back, for his mother tongue had grown unfamiliar, and if
he had not forgotten the words he certainly did not remember how to put them
together. He spoke more like a negro belonging to a French colony.
The fact was that the Governor of Fort Independence was a French
sergeant, an old comrade of Parachapee. He had never left the fort since it had
been built in 1828; and, strange to say, he commanded it with the consent of
the Argentine Government. He was a man about fifty years of age, a Basque
by birth, and his name was Manuel Ipharaguerre, so that he was almost a
Spaniard. A year after his arrival in the country he was naturalized, took
service in the Argentine army, and married an Indian girl, who was then
nursing twin babies six months old—two boys, be it understood, for the good
wife of the Commandant would have never thought of presenting her husband
with girls. Manuel could not conceive of any state but a military one, and he
hoped in due time, with the help of God, to offer the republic a whole
company of young soldiers.
“You saw them. Charming! good soldiers are Jose, Juan, and Miquele!
Pepe, seven year old; Pepe can handle a gun.”
Pepe, hearing himself complimented, brought his two little feet together,
and presented arms with perfect grace.
“He’ll get on!” added the sergeant. “He’ll be colonel-major or brigadiergeneral some day.”
Sergeant Manuel seemed so enchanted that it would have been useless to
express a contrary opinion, either to the profession of arms or the probable
future of his children. He was happy, and as Goethe says, “Nothing that makes
us happy is an illusion.”
All this talk took up a quarter of an hour, to the great astonishment of
Thalcave. The Indian could not understand how so many words could come
out of one throat. No one interrupted the Sergeant, but all things come to an
end, and at last he was silent, but not till he had made his guests enter his
dwelling, and be presented to Madame Ipharaguerre. Then, and not till then,
did he ask his guests what had procured him the honor of their visit. Now or
never was the moment to explain, and Paganel, seizing the chance at once,
began an account of their journey across the Pampas, and ended by inquiring
the reason of the Indians having deserted the country.
“Ah! there was no one!” replied the Sergeant, shrugging his shoulders
—“really no one, and us, too, our arms crossed! Nothing to do!”
“But why?”
“War.”
“War?”
“Yes, civil war between the Paraguayans and Buenos Ayriens,” replied the
Sergeant.
“Well?”
“Well, Indians all in the north, in the rear of General Flores. Indian
pillagers find pillage there.”
“But where are the Caciques?”
“Caciques are with them.”
“What! Catriel?”
“There is no Catriel.”
“And Calfoucoura?”
“There is no Calfoucoura.”
“And is there no Yanchetruz?”
“No; no Yanchetruz.”
The reply was interpreted by Thalcave, who shook his head and gave an
approving look. The Patagonian was either unaware of, or had forgotten that
civil war was decimating the two parts of the republic—a war which
ultimately required the intervention of Brazil. The Indians have everything to
gain by these intestine strifes, and can not lose such fine opportunities of
plunder. There was no doubt the Sergeant was right in assigning war then as
the cause of the forsaken appearance of the plains.
But this circumstance upset all Glenarvan’s projects, for if Harry Grant
was a prisoner in the hands of the Caciques, he must have been dragged north
with them. How and where should they ever find him if that were the case?
Should they attempt a perilous and almost useless journey to the northern
border of the Pampas? It was a serious question which would need to be well
talked over.
However, there was one inquiry more to make to the Sergeant; and it was
the Major who thought of it, for all the others looked at each other in silence.
“Had the Sergeant heard whether any Europeans were prisoners in the
hands of the Caciques?”
Manuel looked thoughtful for a few minutes, like a man trying to ransack
his memory. At last he said:
“Yes.”
“Ah!” said Glenarvan, catching at the fresh hope.
They all eagerly crowded round the Sergeant, exclaiming,
“Tell us, tell us.”
“It was some years ago,” replied Manuel. “Yes; all I heard was that some
Europeans were prisoners, but I never saw them.”
“You are making a mistake,” said Glenarvan. “It can’t be some years ago;
the date of the shipwreck is explicitly given. The BRITANNIA was wrecked in
June, 1862. It is scarcely two years ago.”
“Oh, more than that, my Lord.”
“Impossible!” said Paganel.
“Oh, but it must be. It was when Pepe was born. There were two
prisoners.”
“No, three!” said Glenarvan.
“Two!” replied the Sergeant, in a positive tone.
“Two?” echoed Glenarvan, much surprised. “Two Englishmen?”
“No, no. Who is talking of Englishmen? No; a Frenchman and an Italian.”
“An Italian who was massacred by the Poyuches?” exclaimed Paganel.
“Yes; and I heard afterward that the Frenchman was saved.”
“Saved!” exclaimed young Robert, his very life hanging on the lips of the
Sergeant.
“Yes; delivered out of the hands of the Indians.”
Paganel struck his forehead with an air of desperation, and said at last,
“Ah! I understand. It is all clear now; everything is explained.”
“But what is it?” asked Glenarvan, with as much impatience.
“My friends,” replied Paganel, taking both Robert’s hands in his own, “we
must resign ourselves to a sad disaster. We have been on a wrong track. The
prisoner mentioned is not the captain at all, but one of my own countrymen;
and his companion, who was assassinated by the Poyuches, was Marco
Vazello. The Frenchman was dragged along by the cruel Indians several times
as far as the shores of the Colorado, but managed at length to make his escape,
and return to Colorado. Instead of following the track of Harry Grant, we have
fallen on that of young Guinnard.”
This announcement was heard with profound silence. The mistake was
palpable. The details given by the Sergeant, the nationality of the prisoner, the
murder of his companions, his escape from the hands of the Indians, all
evidenced the fact. Glenarvan looked at Thalcave with a crestfallen face, and
the Indian, turning to the Sergeant, asked whether he had never heard of three
English captives.
“Never,” replied Manuel. “They would have known of them at Tandil, I am
sure. No, it cannot be.”
After this, there was nothing further to do at Fort Independence but to
shake hands with the Commandant, and thank him and take leave.
Glenarvan was in despair at this complete overthrow of his hopes, and
Robert walked silently beside him, with his eyes full of tears. Glenarvan could
not find a word of comfort to say to him. Paganel gesticulated and talked away
to himself. The Major never opened his mouth, nor Thalcave, whose amour
propre, as an Indian, seemed quite wounded by having allowed himself to go
on a wrong scent. No one, however, would have thought of reproaching him
for an error so pardonable.
They went back to the FONDA, and had supper; but it was a gloomy party
that surrounded the table. It was not that any one of them regretted the fatigue
they had so heedlessly endured or the dangers they had run, but they felt their
hope of success was gone, for there was no chance of coming across Captain
Grant between the Sierra Tandil and the sea, as Sergeant Manuel must have
heard if any prisoners had fallen into the hands of the Indians on the coast of
the Atlantic. Any event of this nature would have attracted the notice of the
Indian traders who traffic between Tandil and Carmen, at the mouth of the Rio
Negro. The best thing to do now was to get to the DUNCAN as quick as
possible at the appointed rendezvous.
Paganel asked Glenarvan, however, to let him have the document again, on
the faith of which they had set out on so bootless a search. He read it over and
over, as if trying to extract some new meaning out of it.
“Yet nothing can be clearer,” said Glenarvan; “it gives the date of the
shipwreck, and the manner, and the place of the captivity in the most
categorical manner.”
“That it does not—no, it does not!” exclaimed Paganel, striking the table
with his fist. “Since Harry Grant is not in the Pampas, he is not in America;
but where he is the document must say, and it shall say, my friends, or my
name is not Jacques Paganel any longer.”
CHAPTER XXII THE FLOOD
A distance of 150 miles separates Fort Independence from the shores of the
Atlantic. Unless unexpected and certainly improbable delays should occur, in
four days Glenarvan would rejoin the DUNCAN. But to return on board
without Captain Grant, and after having so completely failed in his search, was
what he could not bring himself to do. Consequently, when next day came, he
gave no orders for departure; the Major took it upon himself to have the horses
saddled, and make all preparations. Thanks to his activity, next morning at
eight o’clock the little troop was descending the grassy slopes of the Sierra.
Glenarvan, with Robert at his side, galloped along without saying a word.
His bold, determined nature made it impossible to take failure quietly. His
heart throbbed as if it would burst, and his head was burning. Paganel, excited
by the difficulty, was turning over and over the words of the document, and
trying to discover some new meaning. Thalcave was perfectly silent, and left
Thaouka to lead the way. The Major, always confident, remained firm at his
post, like a man on whom discouragement takes no hold. Tom Austin and his
two sailors shared the dejection of their master. A timid rabbit happened to run
across their path, and the superstitious men looked at each other in dismay.
“A bad omen,” said Wilson.
“Yes, in the Highlands,” repeated Mulrady.
“What’s bad in the Highlands is not better here,” returned Wilson
sententiously.
Toward noon they had crossed the Sierra, and descended into the
undulating plains which extend to the sea. Limpid RIOS intersected these
plains, and lost themselves among the tall grasses. The ground had once more
become a dead level, the last mountains of the Pampas were passed, and a long
carpet of verdure unrolled itself over the monotonous prairie beneath the
horses’ tread.
Hitherto the weather had been fine, but to-day the sky presented anything
but a reassuring appearance. The heavy vapors, generated by the high
temperature of the preceding days, hung in thick clouds, which ere long would
empty themselves in torrents of rain. Moreover, the vicinity of the Atlantic,
and the prevailing west wind, made the climate of this district particularly
damp. This was evident by the fertility and abundance of the pasture and its
dark color. However, the clouds remained unbroken for the present, and in the
evening, after a brisk gallop of forty miles, the horses stopped on the brink of
deep CANADAS, immense natural trenches filled with water. No shelter was
near, and ponchos had to serve both for tents and coverlets as each man lay
down and fell asleep beneath the threatening sky.
Next day the presence of water became still more sensibly felt; it seemed
to exude from every pore of the ground. Soon large ponds, some just
beginning to form, and some already deep, lay across the route to the east. As
long as they had only to deal with lagoons, circumscribed pieces of water
unencumbered with aquatic plants, the horses could get through well enough,
but when they encountered moving sloughs called PENTANOS, it was harder
work. Tall grass blocked them up, and they were involved in the peril before
they were aware.
These bogs had already proved fatal to more than one living thing, for
Robert, who had got a good bit ahead of the party, came rushing back at full
gallop, calling out:
“Monsieur Paganel, Monsieur Paganel, a forest of horns.”
“What!” exclaimed the geographer; “you have found a forest of horns?”
“Yes, yes, or at any rate a coppice.”
“A coppice!” replied Paganel, shrugging his shoulders. “My boy, you are
dreaming.”
“I am not dreaming, and you will see for yourself. Well, this is a strange
country. They sow horns, and they sprout up like wheat. I wish I could get
some of the seed.”
“The boy is really speaking seriously,” said the Major.
“Yes, Mr. Major, and you will soon see I am right.”
The boy had not been mistaken, for presently they found themselves in
front of an immense field of horns, regularly planted and stretching far out of
sight. It was a complete copse, low and close packed, but a strange sort.
“Well,” said Robert.
“This is peculiar certainly,” said Paganel, and he turned round to question
Thalcave on the subject.
“The horns come out of the ground,” replied the Indian, “but the oxen are
down below.”
“What!” exclaimed Paganel; “do you mean to say that a whole herd was
caught in that mud and buried alive?”
“Yes,” said the Patagonian.
And so it was. An immense herd had been suffocated side by side in this
enormous bog, and this was not the first occurrence of the kind which had
taken place in the Argentine plains.
An hour afterward and the field of horns lay two miles behind.
Thalcave was somewhat anxiously observing a state of things which
appeared to him unusual. He frequently stopped and raised himself on his
stirrups and looked around. His great height gave him a commanding view of
the whole horizon; but after a keen rapid survey, he quickly resumed his seat
and went on. About a mile further he stopped again, and leaving the straight
route, made a circuit of some miles north and south, and then returned and fell
back in his place at the head of the troop, without saying a syllable as to what
he hoped or feared. This strange behavior, several times repeated, made
Glenarvan very uneasy, and quite puzzled Paganel. At last, at Glenarvan’s
request, he asked the Indian about it.
Thalcave replied that he was astonished to see the plains so saturated with
water. Never, to his knowledge, since he had followed the calling of guide, had
he found the ground in this soaking condition. Even in the rainy season, the
Argentine plains had always been passable.
“But what is the cause of this increasing humidity?” said Paganel.
“I do not know, and what if I did?”
“Could it be owing to the RIOS of the Sierra being swollen to overflowing
by the heavy rains?”
“Sometimes they are.”
“And is it the case now?”
“Perhaps.”
Paganel was obliged to be content with this unsatisfactory reply, and went
back to Glenarvan to report the result of his conversation.
“And what does Thalcave advise us to do?” said Glenarvan.
Paganel went back to the guide and asked him.
“Go on fast,” was the reply.
This was easier said than done. The horses soon tired of treading over
ground that gave way at every step. It sank each moment more and more, till it
seemed half under water.
They quickened their pace, but could not go fast enough to escape the
water, which rolled in great sheets at their feet. Before two hours the cataracts
of the sky opened and deluged the plain in true tropical torrents of rain. Never
was there a finer occasion for displaying philosophic equanimity. There was
no shelter, and nothing for it but to bear it stolidly. The ponchos were
streaming like the overflowing gutter-spouts on the roof of a house, and the
unfortunate horsemen had to submit to a double bath, for their horses dashed
up the water to their waists at every step.
In this drenching, shivering state, and worn out with fatigue, they came
toward evening to a miserable RANCHO, which could only have been called a
shelter by people not very fastidious, and certainly only travelers in extremity
would even have entered it; but Glenarvan and his companions had no choice,
and were glad enough to burrow in this wretched hovel, though it would have
been despised by even a poor Indian of the Pampas. A miserable fire of grass
was kindled, which gave out more smoke than heat, and was very difficult to
keep alight, as the torrents of rain which dashed against the ruined cabin
outside found their way within and fell down in large drops from the roof.
Twenty times over the fire would have been extinguished if Mulrady and
Wilson had not kept off the water.
The supper was a dull meal, and neither appetizing nor reviving. Only the
Major seemed to eat with any relish. The impassive McNabbs was superior to
all circumstances. Paganel, Frenchman as he was, tried to joke, but the attempt
was a failure.
“My jests are damp,” he said, “they miss fire.”
The only consolation in such circumstances was to sleep, and accordingly
each one lay down and endeavored to find in slumber a temporary
forgetfulness of his discomforts and his fatigues. The night was stormy, and
the planks of the rancho cracked before the blast as if every instant they would
give way. The poor horses outside, exposed to all the inclemency of the
weather, were making piteous moans, and their masters were suffering quite as
much inside the ruined RANCHO. However, sleep overpowered them at
length. Robert was the first to close his eyes and lean his head against
Glenarvan’s shoulder, and soon all the rest were soundly sleeping too under
the guardian eye of Heaven.
The night passed safely, and no one stirred till Thaouka woke them by
tapping vigorously against the RANCHO with his hoof. He knew it was time
to start, and at a push could give the signal as well as his master. They owed
the faithful creature too much to disobey him, and set off immediately.
The rain had abated, but floods of water still covered the ground. Paganel,
on consulting his map, came to the conclusion that the RIOS Grande and
Vivarota, into which the water from the plains generally runs, must have been
united in one large bed several miles in extent.
Extreme haste was imperative, for all their lives depended on it. Should the
inundation increase, where could they find refuge? Not a single elevated point
was visible on the whole circle of the horizon, and on such level plains water
would sweep along with fearful rapidity.
The horses were spurred on to the utmost, and Thaouka led the way,
bounding over the water as if it had been his natural element. Certainly he
might justly have been called a sea-horse—better than many of the
amphibious animals who bear that name.
All of a sudden, about ten in the morning, Thaouka betrayed symptoms of
violent agitation. He kept turning round toward the south, neighing
continually, and snorting with wide open nostrils. He reared violently, and
Thalcave had some difficulty in keeping his seat. The foam from his mouth
was tinged with blood from the action of the bit, pulled tightly by his master’s
strong hand, and yet the fiery animal would not be still. Had he been free, his
master knew he would have fled away to the north as fast as his legs would
have carried him.
“What is the matter with Thaouka?” asked Paganel. “Is he bitten by the
leeches? They are very voracious in the Argentine streams.”
“No,” replied the Indian.
“Is he frightened at something, then?”
“Yes, he scents danger.”
“What danger?”
“I don’t know.”
But, though no danger was apparent to the eye, the ear could catch the
sound of a murmuring noise beyond the limits of the horizon, like the coming
in of the tide. Soon a confused sound was heard of bellowing and neighing and
bleating, and about a mile to the south immense flocks appeared, rushing and
tumbling over each other in the greatest disorder, as they hurried pell-mell
along with inconceivable rapidity. They raised such a whirlwind of water in
their course that it was impossible to distinguish them clearly. A hundred
whales of the largest size could hardly have dashed up the ocean waves more
violently.
“Anda, anda!” (quick, quick), shouted Thalcave, in a voice like thunder.
“What is it, then?” asked Paganel.
“The rising,” replied Thalcave.
“He means an inundation,” exclaimed Paganel, flying with the others after
Thalcave, who had spurred on his horse toward the north.
It was high time, for about five miles south an immense towering wave
was seen advancing over the plain, and changing the whole country into an
ocean. The tall grass disappeared before it as if cut down by a scythe, and
clumps of mimosas were torn up and drifted about like floating islands.
The wave was speeding on with the rapidity of a racehorse, and the
travelers fled before it like a cloud before a storm-wind. They looked in vain
for some harbor of refuge, and the terrified horses galloped so wildly along
that the riders could hardly keep their saddles.
“Anda, anda!” shouted Thalcave, and again they spurred on the poor
animals till the blood ran from their lacerated sides. They stumbled every now
and then over great cracks in the ground, or got entangled in the hidden grass
below the water. They fell, and were pulled up only to fall again and again,
and be pulled up again and again. The level of the waters was sensibly rising,
and less than two miles off the gigantic wave reared its crested head.
For a quarter of an hour this supreme struggle with the most terrible of
elements lasted. The fugitives could not tell how far they had gone, but,
judging by the speed, the distance must have been considerable. The poor
horses, however, were breast-high in water now, and could only advance with
extreme difficulty. Glenarvan and Paganel, and, indeed, the whole party, gave
themselves up for lost, as the horses were fast getting out of their depth, and
six feet of water would be enough to drown them.
It would be impossible to tell the anguish of mind these eight men endured;
they felt their own impotence in the presence of these cataclysms of nature so
far beyond all human power. Their salvation did not lie in their own hands.
Five minutes afterward, and the horses were swimming; the current alone
carried them along with tremendous force, and with a swiftness equal to their
fastest gallop; they must have gone fully twenty miles an hour.
All hope of delivery seemed impossible, when the Major suddenly called
out:
“A tree!”
“A tree?” exclaimed Glenarvan.
“Yes, there, there!” replied Thalcave, pointing with his finger to a species
of gigantic walnut-tree, which raised its solitary head above the waters.
His companions needed no urging forward now; this tree, so opportunely
discovered, they must reach at all hazards. The horses very likely might not be
able to get to it, but, at all events, the men would, the current bearing them
right down to it.
Just at that moment Tom Austin’s horse gave a smothered neigh and
disappeared. His master, freeing his feet from the stirrups, began to swim
vigorously.
“Hang on to my saddle,” called Glenarvan.
“Thanks, your honor, but I have good stout arms.”
“Robert, how is your horse going?” asked his Lordship, turning to young
Grant.
“Famously, my Lord, he swims like a fish.”
“Lookout!” shouted the Major, in a stentorian voice.
The warning was scarcely spoken before the enormous billow, a monstrous
wave forty feet high, broke over the fugitives with a fearful noise. Men and
animals all disappeared in a whirl of foam; a liquid mass, weighing several
millions of tons, engulfed them in its seething waters.
When it had rolled on, the men reappeared on the surface, and counted
each other rapidly; but all the horses, except Thaouka, who still bore his
master, had gone down forever.
“Courage, courage,” repeated Glenarvan, supporting Paganel with one
arm, and swimming with the other.
“I can manage, I can manage,” said the worthy savant. “I am even not
sorry—”
But no one ever knew what he was not sorry about, for the poor man was
obliged to swallow down the rest of his sentence with half a pint of muddy
water. The Major advanced quietly, making regular strokes, worthy of a master
swimmer. The sailors took to the water like porpoises, while Robert clung to
Thaouka’s mane, and was carried along with him. The noble animal swam
superbly, instinctively making for the tree in a straight line.
The tree was only twenty fathoms off, and in a few minutes was safely
reached by the whole party; but for this refuge they must all have perished in
the flood.
The water had risen to the top of the trunk, just to where the parent
branches fork out. It was consequently, quite easy to clamber up to it.
Thalcave climbed up first, and got off his horse to hoist up Robert and help the
others. His powerful arms had soon placed all the exhausted swimmers in a
place of security.
But, meantime, Thaouka was being rapidly carried away by the current. He
turned his intelligent face toward his master, and, shaking his long mane,
neighed as if to summon him to his rescue.
“Are you going to forsake him, Thalcave?” asked Paganel.
“I!” replied the Indian, and forthwith he plunged down into the tumultuous
waters, and came up again ten fathoms off. A few instants afterward his arms
were round Thaouka’s neck, and master and steed were drifting together
toward the misty horizon of the north.
CHAPTER XXIII A SINGULAR ABODE
The tree on which Glenarvan and his companions had just found refuge,
resembled a walnut-tree, having the same glossy foliage and rounded form. In
reality, however, it was the OMBU, which grows solitarily on the Argentine
plains. The enormous and twisted trunk of this tree is planted firmly in the
soil, not only by its great roots, but still more by its vigorous shoots, which
fasten it down in the most tenacious manner. This was how it stood proof
against the shock of the mighty billow.
This OMBU measured in height a hundred feet, and covered with its
shadow a circumference of one hundred and twenty yards. All this scaffolding
rested on three great boughs which sprang from the trunk. Two of these rose
almost perpendicularly, and supported the immense parasol of foliage, the
branches of which were so crossed and intertwined and entangled, as if by the
hand of a basket-maker, that they formed an impenetrable shade. The third
arm, on the contrary, stretched right out in a horizontal position above the
roaring waters, into which the lower leaves dipped. There was no want of
room in the interior of this gigantic tree, for there were great gaps in the
foliage, perfect glades, with air in abundance, and freshness everywhere. To
see the innumerable branches rising to the clouds, and the creepers running
from bough to bough, and attaching them together while the sunlight glinted
here and there among the leaves, one might have called it a complete forest
instead of a solitary tree sheltering them all.
On the arrival of the fugitives a myriad of the feathered tribes fled away
into the topmost branches, protesting by their outcries against this flagrant
usurpation of their domicile. These birds, who themselves had taken refuge in
the solitary OMBU, were in hundreds, comprising blackbirds, starlings, isacas,
HILGUEROS, and especially the pica-flor, humming-birds of most
resplendent colors. When they flew away it seemed as though a gust of wind
had blown all the flowers off the tree.
Such was the asylum offered to the little band of Glenarvan. Young Grant
and the agile Wilson were scarcely perched on the tree before they had
climbed to the upper branches and put their heads through the leafy dome to
get a view of the vast horizon. The ocean made by the inundation surrounded
them on all sides, and, far as the eye could reach, seemed to have no limits.
Not a single tree was visible on the liquid plain; the OMBU stood alone amid
the rolling waters, and trembled before them. In the distance, drifting from
south to north, carried along by the impetuous torrent, they saw trees torn up
by the roots, twisted branches, roofs torn off, destroyed RANCHOS, planks of
sheds stolen by the deluge from ESTANCIAS, carcasses of drowned animals,
blood-stained skins, and on a shaky tree a complete family of jaguars, howling
and clutching hold of their frail raft. Still farther away, a black spot almost
invisible, already caught Wilson’s eye. It was Thalcave and his faithful
Thaouka.
“Thalcave, Thalcave!” shouted Robert, stretching out his hands toward the
courageous Patagonian.
“He will save himself, Mr. Robert,” replied Wilson; “we must go down to
his Lordship.”
Next minute they had descended the three stages of boughs, and landed
safely on the top of the trunk, where they found Glenarvan, Paganel, the
Major, Austin, and Mulrady, sitting either astride or in some position they
found more comfortable. Wilson gave an account of their investigations aloft,
and all shared his opinion with respect to Thalcave. The only question was
whether it was Thalcave who would save Thaouka, or Thaouka save Thalcave.
Their own situation meantime was much more alarming than his. No doubt
the tree would be able to resist the current, but the waters might rise higher
and higher, till the topmost branches were covered, for the depression of the
soil made this part of the plain a deep reservoir. Glenarvan’s first care,
consequently, was to make notches by which to ascertain the progress of the
inundation. For the present it was stationary, having apparently reached its
height. This was reassuring.
“And now what are we going to do?” said Glenarvan.
“Make our nest, of course!” replied Paganel
“Make our nest!” exclaimed Robert.
“Certainly, my boy, and live the life of birds, since we can’t that of fishes.”
“All very well, but who will fill our bills for us?” said Glenarvan.
“I will,” said the Major.
All eyes turned toward him immediately, and there he sat in a natural arm-
chair, formed of two elastic boughs, holding out his ALFORJAS damp, but
still intact.
“Oh, McNabbs, that’s just like you,” exclaimed Glenarvan, “you think of
everything even under circumstances which would drive all out of your head.”
“Since it was settled we were not going to be drowned, I had no intention
of starving of hunger.”
“I should have thought of it, too,” said Paganel, “but I am so DISTRAIT.”
“And what is in the ALFORJAS?” asked Tom Austin.
“Food enough to last seven men for two days,” replied McNabbs.
“And I hope the inundation will have gone down in twenty-four hours,”
said Glenarvan.
“Or that we shall have found some way of regaining terra firma,” added
Paganel.
“Our first business, then, now is to breakfast,” said Glenarvan.
“I suppose you mean after we have made ourselves dry,” observed the
Major.
“And where’s the fire?” asked Wilson.
“We must make it,” returned Paganel.
“Where?”
“On the top of the trunk, of course.”
“And what with?”
“With the dead wood we cut off the tree.”
“But how will you kindle it?” asked Glenarvan. “Our tinder is just like wet
sponge.”
“We can dispense with it,” replied Paganel. “We only want a little dry moss
and a ray of sunshine, and the lens of my telescope, and you’ll see what a fire
I’ll get to dry myself by. Who will go and cut wood in the forest?”
“I will,” said Robert.
And off he scampered like a young cat into the depths of the foliage,
followed by his friend Wilson. Paganel set to work to find dry moss, and had
soon gathered sufficient. This he laid on a bed of damp leaves, just where the
large branches began to fork out, forming a natural hearth, where there was
little fear of conflagration.
Robert and Wilson speedily reappeared, each with an armful of dry wood,
which they threw on the moss. By the help of the lens it was easily kindled, for
the sun was blazing overhead. In order to ensure a proper draught, Paganel
stood over the hearth with his long legs straddled out in the Arab manner.
Then stooping down and raising himself with a rapid motion, he made a
violent current of air with his poncho, which made the wood take fire, and
soon a bright flame roared in the improvised brasier. After drying themselves,
each in his own fashion, and hanging their ponchos on the tree, where they
were swung to and fro in the breeze, they breakfasted, carefully however
rationing out the provisions, for the morrow had to be thought of; the immense
basin might not empty so soon as Glenarvan expected, and, anyway, the
supply was very limited. The OMBU produced no fruit, though fortunately, it
would likely abound in fresh eggs, thanks to the numerous nests stowed away
among the leaves, not to speak of their feathered proprietors. These resources
were by no means to be despised.
The next business was to install themselves as comfortably as they could,
in prospect of a long stay.
“As the kitchen and dining-room are on the ground floor,” said Paganel,
“we must sleep on the first floor. The house is large, and as the rent is not dear,
we must not cramp ourselves for room. I can see up yonder natural cradles, in
which once safely tucked up we shall sleep as if we were in the best beds in
the world. We have nothing to fear. Besides, we will watch, and we are
numerous enough to repulse a fleet of Indians and other wild animals.”
“We only want fire-arms.”
“I have my revolvers,” said Glenarvan.
“And I have mine,” replied Robert.
“But what’s the good of them?” said Tom Austin, “unless Monsieur
Paganel can find out some way of making powder.”
“We don’t need it,” replied McNabbs, exhibiting a powder flask in a
perfect state of preservation.
“Where did you get it from, Major,” asked Paganel.
“From Thalcave. He thought it might be useful to us, and gave it to me
before he plunged into the water to save Thaouka.”
“Generous, brave Indian!” exclaimed Glenarvan.
“Yes,” replied Tom Austin, “if all the Patagonians are cut after the same
pattern, I must compliment Patagonia.”
“I protest against leaving out the horse,” said Paganel. “He is part and
parcel of the Patagonian, and I’m much mistaken if we don’t see them again,
the one on the other’s back.”
“What distance are we from the Atlantic?” asked the Major.
“About forty miles at the outside,” replied Paganel; “and now, friends,
since this is Liberty Hall, I beg to take leave of you. I am going to choose an
observatory for myself up there, and by the help of my telescope, let you know
how things are going on in the world.”
Forthwith the geographer set off, hoisting himself up very cleverly from
bough to bough, till he disappeared beyond the thick foliage. His companions
began to arrange the night quarters, and prepare their beds. But this was
neither a long nor difficult task, and very soon they resumed their seats round
the fire to have a talk.
As usual their theme was Captain Grant. In three days, should the water
subside, they would be on board the DUNCAN once more. But Harry Grant
and his two sailors, those poor shipwrecked fellows, would not be with them.
Indeed, it even seemed after this ill success and this useless journey across
America, that all chance of finding them was gone forever. Where could they
commence a fresh quest? What grief Lady Helena and Mary Grant would feel
on hearing there was no further hope.
“Poor sister!” said Robert. “It is all up with us.”
For the first time Glenarvan could not find any comfort to give him. What
could he say to the lad?
Had they not searched exactly where the document stated?
“And yet,” he said, “this thirty-seventh degree of latitude is not a mere
figure, and that it applies to the shipwreck or captivity of Harry Grant, is no
mere guess or supposition. We read it with our own eyes.”
“All very true, your Honor,” replied Tom Austin, “and yet our search has
been unsuccessful.”
“It is both a provoking and hopeless business,” replied Glenarvan.
“Provoking enough, certainly,” said the Major, “but not hopeless. It is
precisely because we have an uncontestable figure, provided for us, that we
should follow it up to the end.”
“What do you mean?” asked Glenarvan. “What more can we do?”
“A very logical and simple thing, my dear Edward. When we go on board
the DUNCAN, turn her beak head to the east, and go right along the thirtyseventh parallel till we come back to our starting point if necessary.”
“Do you suppose that I have not thought of that, Mr. McNabbs?” replied
Glenarvan. “Yes, a hundred times. But what chance is there of success? To
leave the American continent, wouldn’t it be to go away from the very spot
indicated by Harry Grant, from this very Patagonia so distinctly named in the
document.”
“And would you recommence your search in the Pampas, when you have
the certainty that the shipwreck of the BRITANNIA neither occurred on the
coasts of the Pacific nor the Atlantic?”
Glenarvan was silent.
“And however small the chance of finding Harry Grant by following up
the given parallel, ought we not to try?”
“I don’t say no,” replied Glenarvan.
“And are you not of my opinion, good friends,” added the Major,
addressing the sailors.
“Entirely,” said Tom Austin, while Mulrady and Wilson gave an assenting
nod.
“Listen to me, friends,” said Glenarvan after a few minutes’ reflection;
“and remember, Robert, this is a grave discussion. I will do my utmost to find
Captain Grant; I am pledged to it, and will devote my whole life to the task if
needs be. All Scotland would unite with me to save so devoted a son as he has
been to her. I too quite think with you that we must follow the thirty-seventh
parallel round the globe if necessary, however slight our chance of finding
him. But that is not the question we have to settle. There is one much more
important than that is—should we from this time, and all together, give up our
search on the American continent?”
No one made any reply. Each one seemed afraid to pronounce the word.
“Well?” resumed Glenarvan, addressing himself especially to the Major.
“My dear Edward,” replied McNabbs, “it would be incurring too great a
responsibility for me to reply hic et nunc. It is a question which requires
reflection. I must know first, through which countries the thirty-seventh
parallel of southern latitude passes?”
“That’s Paganel’s business; he will tell you that,” said Glenarvan.
“Let’s ask him, then,” replied the Major.
But the learned geographer was nowhere to be seen. He was hidden among
the thick leafage of the OMBU, and they must call out if they wanted him.
“Paganel, Paganel!” shouted Glenarvan.
“Here,” replied a voice that seemed to come from the clouds.
“Where are you?”
“In my tower.”
“What are you doing there?”
“Examining the wide horizon.”
“Could you come down for a minute?”
“Do you want me?”
“Yes.”
“What for?”
“To know what countries the thirty-seventh parallel passes through.”
“That’s easily said. I need not disturb myself to come down for that.”
“Very well, tell us now.”
“Listen, then. After leaving America the thirty-seventh parallel crosses the
Atlantic Ocean.”
“And then?”
“It encounters Isle Tristan d’Acunha.”
“Yes.”
“It goes on two degrees below the Cape of Good Hope.”
“And afterwards?”
“Runs across the Indian Ocean, and just touches Isle St. Pierre, in the
Amsterdam group.”
“Go on.”
“It cuts Australia by the province of Victoria.”
“And then.”
“After leaving Australia in—”
This last sentence was not completed. Was the geographer hesitating, or
didn’t he know what to say?
No; but a terrible cry resounded from the top of the tree. Glenarvan and his
friends turned pale and looked at each other. What fresh catastrophe had
happened now? Had the unfortunate Paganel slipped his footing?
Already Wilson and Mulrady had rushed to his rescue when his long body
appeared tumbling down from branch to branch.
But was he living or dead, for his hands made no attempt to seize anything
to stop himself. A few minutes more, and he would have fallen into the roaring
waters had not the Major’s strong arm barred his passage.
“Much obliged, McNabbs,” said Paganel.
“How’s this? What is the matter with you? What came over you? Another
of your absent fits.”
“Yes, yes,” replied Paganel, in a voice almost inarticulate with emotion.
“Yes, but this was something extraordinary.”
“What was it?”
“I said we had made a mistake. We are making it still, and have been all
along.”
“Explain yourself.”
“Glenarvan, Major, Robert, my friends,” exclaimed Paganel, “all you that
hear me, we are looking for Captain Grant where he is not to be found.”
“What do you say?” exclaimed Glenarvan.
“Not only where he is not now, but where he has never been.”
CHAPTER XXIV PAGANEL’S DISCLOSURE
Profound astonishment greeted these unexpected words of the learned
geographer. What could he mean? Had he lost his sense? He spoke with such
conviction, however, that all eyes turned toward Glenarvan, for Paganel’s
affirmation was a direct answer to his question, but Glenarvan shook his head,
and said nothing, though evidently he was not inclined to favor his friend’s
views.
“Yes,” began Paganel again, as soon as he had recovered himself a little;
“yes, we have gone a wrong track, and read on the document what was never
there.”
“Explain yourself, Paganel,” said the Major, “and more calmly if you can.”
“The thing is very simple, Major. Like you, I was in error; like you, I had
rushed at a false interpretation, until about an instant ago, on the top of the
tree, when I was answering your questions, just as I pronounced the word
‘Australia,’ a sudden flash came across my mind, and the document became
clear as day.”
“What!” exclaimed Glenarvan, “you mean to say that Harry Grant—”
“I mean to say,” replied Paganel, “that the word AUSTRAL that occurs in
the document is not a complete word, as we have supposed up till now, but
just the root of the word AUSTRALIE.”
“Well, that would be strange,” said the Major.
“Strange!” repeated Glenarvan, shrugging his shoulders; “it is simply
impossible.”
“Impossible?” returned Paganel. “That is a word we don’t allow in
France.”
“What!” continued Glenarvan, in a tone of the most profound incredulity,
“you dare to contend, with the document in your hand, that the shipwreck of
the BRITANNIA happened on the shores of Australia.”
“I am sure of it,” replied Paganel.
“My conscience,” exclaimed Glenarvan, “I must say I am surprised at such
a declaration from the Secretary of a Geographical Society!”
“And why so?” said Paganel, touched in his weak point.
“Because, if you allow the word AUSTRALIE! you must also allow the
word INDIENS, and Indians are never seen there.”
Paganel was not the least surprised at this rejoinder. Doubtless he expected
it, for he began to smile, and said:
“My dear Glenarvan, don’t triumph over me too fast. I am going to floor
you completely, and never was an Englishman more thoroughly defeated than
you will be. It will be the revenge for Cressy and Agincourt.”
“I wish nothing better. Take your revenge, Paganel.”
“Listen, then. In the text of the document, there is neither mention of the
Indians nor of Patagonia! The incomplete word INDI does not mean
INDIENS, but of course, INDIGENES, aborigines! Now, do you admit that
there are aborigines in Australia?”
“Bravo, Paganel!” said the Major.
“Well, do you agree to my interpretation, my dear Lord?” asked the
geographer again.
“Yes,” replied Glenarvan, “if you will prove to me that the fragment of a
word GONIE, does not refer to the country of the Patagonians.”
“Certainly it does not. It has nothing to do with Patagonia,” said Paganel.
“Read it any way you please except that.”
“How?”
“Cosmogonie, theogonie, agonie.”
“AGONIE,” said the Major.
“I don’t care which,” returned Paganel. “The word is quite unimportant; I
will not even try to find out its meaning. The main point is that AUSTRAL
means AUSTRALIE, and we must have gone blindly on a wrong track not to
have discovered the explanation at the very beginning, it was so evident. If I
had found the document myself, and my judgment had not been misled by
your interpretation, I should never have read it differently.”
A burst of hurrahs, and congratulations, and compliments followed
Paganel’s words. Austin and the sailors, and the Major and Robert, most all
overjoyed at this fresh hope, applauded him heartily; while even Glenarvan,
whose eyes were gradually getting open, was almost prepared to give in.
“I only want to know one thing more, my dear Paganel,” he said, “and then
I must bow to your perspicacity.”
“What is it?”
“How will you group the words together according to your new
interpretation? How will the document read?”
“Easily enough answered. Here is the document,” replied Paganel, taking
out the precious paper he had been studying so conscientiously for the last few
days.
For a few minutes there was complete silence, while the worthy SAVANT
took time to collect his thoughts before complying with his lordship’s request.
Then putting his finger on the words, and emphasizing some of them, he
began as follows:
“‘Le 7 juin 1862 le trois-mats Britannia de Glasgow a sombre apres,’—put,
if you please, ‘deux jours, trois jours,’ or ‘une longue agonie,’ it doesn’t
signify, it is quite a matter of indifference,—‘sur les cotes de l’Australie. Se
dirigeant a terre, deux matelots et le Capitaine Grant vont essayer d’aborder,’
or ‘ont aborde le continent ou ils seront,’ or, ‘sont prisonniers de cruels
indigenes. Ils ont jete ce documents,’ etc. Is that clear?”
“Clear enough,” replied Glenarvan, “if the word continent can be applied
to Australia, which is only an island.”
“Make yourself easy about that, my dear Glenarvan; the best geographers
have agreed to call the island the Australian Continent.”
“Then all I have now to say is, my friends,” said Glenarvan, “away to
Australia, and may Heaven help us!”
“To Australia!” echoed his companions, with one voice.
“I tell you what, Paganel,” added Glenarvan, “your being on board the
DUNCAN is a perfect providence.”
“All right. Look on me as a messenger of providence, and let us drop the
subject.”
So the conversation ended—a conversation which great results were to
follow; it completely changed the moral condition of the travelers; it gave the
clew of the labyrinth in which they had thought themselves hopelessly
entangled, and, amid their ruined projects, inspired them with fresh hope.
They could now quit the American Continent without the least hesitation, and
already their thoughts had flown to the Australias. In going on board the
DUNCAN again they would not bring despair with them, and Lady Helena
and Mary Grant would not have to mourn the irrevocable loss of Captain
Grant. This thought so filled them with joy that they forgot all the dangers of
their actual situation, and only regretted that they could not start immediately.
It was about four o’clock in the afternoon, and they determined to have
supper at six. Paganel wished to get up a splendid spread in honor of the
occasion, but as the materials were very scanty, he proposed to Robert to go
and hunt in the neighboring forest. Robert clapped his hands at the idea, so
they took Thalcave’s powder flask, cleaned the revolvers and loaded them
with small shot, and set off.
“Don’t go too far,” said the Major, gravely, to the two hunters.
After their departure, Glenarvan and McNabbs went down to examine the
state of the water by looking at the notches they had made on the tree, and
Wilson and Mulrady replenished the fire.
No sign of decrease appeared on the surface of the immense lake, yet the
flood seemed to have reached its maximum height; but the violence with
which it rushed from the south to north proved that the equilibrium of the
Argentine rivers was not restored. Before getting lower the liquid mass must
remain stationary, as in the case with the ocean before the ebb tide
commences.
While Glenarvan and his cousin were making these observations, the
report of firearms resounded frequently above their heads, and the jubilant
outcries of the two sportsmen—for Paganel was every whit as much a child as
Robert. They were having a fine time of it among the thick leaves, judging by
the peals of laughter which rang out in the boy’s clear treble voice and
Paganel’s deep bass. The chase was evidently successful, and wonders in
culinary art might be expected. Wilson had a good idea to begin with, which
he had skilfully carried out; for when Glenarvan came back to the brasier, he
found that the brave fellow had actually managed to catch, with only a pin and
a piece of string, several dozen small fish, as delicate as smelts, called
MOJARRAS, which were all jumping about in a fold of his poncho, ready to
be converted into an exquisite dish.
At the same moment the hunters reappeared. Paganel was carefully
carrying some black swallows’ eggs, and a string of sparrows, which he meant
to serve up later under the name of field larks. Robert had been clever enough
to bring down several brace of HILGUEROS, small green and yellow birds,
which are excellent eating, and greatly in demand in the Montevideo market.
Paganel, who knew fifty ways of dressing eggs, was obliged for this once to be
content with simply hardening them on the hot embers. But notwithstanding
this, the viands at the meal were both dainty and varied. The dried beef, hard
eggs, grilled MOJARRAS, sparrows, and roast HILGUEROS, made one of
those gala feasts the memory of which is imperishable.
The conversation was very animated. Many compliments were paid
Paganel on his twofold talents as hunter and cook, which the SAVANT
accepted with the modesty which characterizes true merit. Then he turned the
conversation on the peculiarities of the OMBU, under whose canopy they had
found shelter, and whose depths he declared were immense.
“Robert and I,” he added, jestingly, “thought ourselves hunting in the open
forest. I was afraid, for the minute, we should lose ourselves, for I could not
find the road. The sun was sinking below the horizon; I sought vainly for
footmarks; I began to feel the sharp pangs of hunger, and the gloomy depths of
the forest resounded already with the roar of wild beasts. No, not that; there
are no wild beasts here, I am sorry to say.”
“What!” exclaimed Glenarvan, “you are sorry there are no wild beasts?”
“Certainly I am.”
“And yet we should have every reason to dread their ferocity.”
“Their ferocity is non-existent, scientifically speaking,” replied the learned
geographer.
“Now come, Paganel,” said the Major, “you’ll never make me admit the
utility of wild beasts. What good are they?”
“Why, Major,” exclaimed Paganel, “for purposes of classification into
orders, and families, and species, and sub-species.”
“A mighty advantage, certainly!” replied McNabbs, “I could dispense with
all that. If I had been one of Noah’s companions at the time of the deluge, I
should most assuredly have hindered the imprudent patriarch from putting in
pairs of lions, and tigers, and panthers, and bears, and such animals, for they
are as malevolent as they are useless.”
“You would have done that?” asked Paganel.
“Yes, I would.”
“Well, you would have done wrong in a zoological point of view,” returned
Paganel.
“But not in a humanitarian one,” rejoined the Major.
“It is shocking!” replied Paganel. “Why, for my part, on the contrary, I
should have taken special care to preserve megatheriums and pterodactyles,
and all the antediluvian species of which we are unfortunately deprived by his
neglect.”
“And I say,” returned McNabbs, “that Noah did a very good thing when he
abandoned them to their fate—that is, if they lived in his day.”
“And I say he did a very bad thing,” retorted Paganel, “and he has justly
merited the malediction of SAVANTS to the end of time!”
The rest of the party could not help laughing at hearing the two friends
disputing over old Noah. Contrary to all his principles, the Major, who all his
life had never disputed with anyone, was always sparring with Paganel. The
geographer seemed to have a peculiarly exciting effect on him.
Glenarvan, as usual, always the peacemaker, interfered in the debate, and
said:
“Whether the loss of ferocious animals is to be regretted or not, in a
scientific point of view, there is no help for it now; we must be content to do
without them. Paganel can hardly expect to meet with wild beasts in this aerial
forest.”
“Why not?” asked the geographer.
“Wild beasts on a tree!” exclaimed Tom Austin.
“Yes, undoubtedly. The American tiger, the jaguar, takes refuge in the
trees, when the chase gets too hot for him. It is quite possible that one of these
animals, surprised by the inundation, might have climbed up into this OMBU,
and be hiding now among its thick foliage.”
“You haven’t met any of them, at any rate, I suppose?” said the Major.
“No,” replied Paganel, “though we hunted all through the wood. It is
vexing, for it would have been a splendid chase. A jaguar is a bloodthirsty,
ferocious creature. He can twist the neck of a horse with a single stroke of his
paw. When he has once tasted human flesh he scents it greedily. He likes to eat
an Indian best, and next to him a negro, then a mulatto, and last of all a white
man.”
“I am delighted to hear we come number four,” said McNabbs.
“That only proves you are insipid,” retorted Paganel, with an air of disdain.
“I am delighted to be insipid,” was the Major’s reply.
“Well, it is humiliating enough,” said the intractable Paganel. “The white
man proclaimed himself chief of the human race; but Mr. Jaguar is of a
different opinion it seems.”
“Be that as it may, my brave Paganel, seeing there are neither Indians, nor
negroes, nor mulattoes among us, I am quite rejoiced at the absence of your
beloved jaguars. Our situation is not so particularly agreeable.”
“What! not agreeable!” exclaimed Paganel, jumping at the word as likely
to give a new turn to the conversation. “You are complaining of your lot,
Glenarvan.”
“I should think so, indeed,” replied Glenarvan. “Do you find these
uncomfortable hard branches very luxurious?”
“I have never been more comfortable, even in my study. We live like the
birds, we sing and fly about. I begin to believe men were intended to live on
trees.”
“But they want wings,” suggested the Major.
“They’ll make them some day.”
“And till then,” put in Glenarvan, “with your leave, I prefer the gravel of a
park, or the floor of a house, or the deck of a ship, to this aerial dwelling.”
“We must take things as they come, Glenarvan,” returned Paganel. “If
good, so much the better; if bad, never mind. Ah, I see you are wishing you
had all the comforts of Malcolm Castle.”
“No, but—”
“I am quite certain Robert is perfectly happy,” interrupted Paganel, eager
to insure one partisan at least.
“Yes, that I am!” exclaimed Robert, in a joyous tone.
“At his age it is quite natural,” replied Glenarvan.
“And at mine, too,” returned the geographer. “The fewer one’s comforts,
the fewer one’s needs; and the fewer one’s needs, the greater one’s happiness.”
“Now, now,” said the Major, “here is Paganel running a tilt against riches
and gilt ceilings.”
“No, McNabbs,” replied the SAVANT, “I’m not; but if you like, I’ll tell
you a little Arabian story that comes into my mind, very APROPOS this
minute.”
“Oh, do, do,” said Robert.
“And what is your story to prove, Paganel?” inquired the Major.
“Much what all stories prove, my brave comrade.”
“Not much then,” rejoined McNabbs. “But go on, Scheherazade, and tell
us the story.”
“There was once,” said Paganel, “a son of the great Haroun-al-Raschid,
who was unhappy, and went to consult an old Dervish. The old sage told him
that happiness was a difficult thing to find in this world. ‘However,’ he added,
‘I know an infallible means of procuring your happiness.’ ‘What is it?’ asked
the young Prince. ‘It is to put the shirt of a happy man on your shoulders.’
Whereupon the Prince embraced the old man, and set out at once to search for
his talisman. He visited all the capital cities in the world. He tried on the shirts
of kings, and emperors, and princes and nobles; but all in vain: he could not
find a man among them that was happy. Then he put on the shirts of artists,
and warriors, and merchants; but these were no better. By this time he had
traveled a long way, without finding what he sought. At last he began to
despair of success, and began sorrowfully to retrace his steps back to his
father’s palace, when one day he heard an honest peasant singing so merrily as
he drove the plow, that he thought, ‘Surely this man is happy, if there is such a
thing as happiness on earth.’ Forthwith he accosted him, and said, ‘Are you
happy?’ ‘Yes,’ was the reply. ‘There is nothing you desire?’ ‘Nothing.’ ‘You
would not change your lot for that of a king?’ ‘Never!’ ‘Well, then, sell me
your shirt.’ ‘My shirt! I haven’t one!’”
CHAPTER XXV BETWEEN FIRE AND WATER
Before turning into “their nest,” as Paganel had called it, he, and Robert,
and Glenarvan climbed up into the observatory to have one more inspection of
the liquid plain. It was about nine o’clock; the sun had just sunk behind the
glowing mists of the western horizon.
The eastern horizon was gradually assuming a most stormy aspect. A thick
dark bar of cloud was rising higher and higher, and by degrees extinguishing
the stars. Before long half the sky was overspread. Evidently motive power lay
in the cloud itself, for there was not a breath of wind. Absolute calm reigned in
the atmosphere; not a leaf stirred on the tree, not a ripple disturbed the surface
of the water. There seemed to be scarcely any air even, as though some vast
pneumatic machine had rarefied it. The entire atmosphere was charged to the
utmost with electricity, the presence of which sent a thrill through the whole
nervous system of all animated beings.
“We are going to have a storm,” said Paganel.
“You’re not afraid of thunder, are you, Robert?” asked Glenarvan.
“No, my Lord!” exclaimed Robert. “Well, my boy, so much the better, for
a storm is not far off.”
“And a violent one, too,” added Paganel, “if I may judge by the look of
things.”
“It is not the storm I care about,” said Glenarvan, “so much as the torrents
of rain that will accompany it. We shall be soaked to the skin. Whatever you
may say, Paganel, a nest won’t do for a man, and you will learn that soon, to
your cost.”
“With the help of philosophy, it will,” replied Paganel.
“Philosophy! that won’t keep you from getting drenched.”
“No, but it will warm you.”
“Well,” said Glenarvan, “we had better go down to our friends, and advise
them to wrap themselves up in their philosophy and their ponchos as tightly as
possible, and above all, to lay in a stock of patience, for we shall need it before
very long.”
Glenarvan gave a last glance at the angry sky. The clouds now covered it
entirely; only a dim streak of light shone faintly in the west. A dark shadow
lay on the water, and it could hardly be distinguished from the thick vapors
above it. There was no sensation of light or sound. All was darkness and
silence around.
“Let us go down,” said Glenarvan; “the thunder will soon burst over us.”
On returning to the bottom of the tree, they found themselves, to their great
surprise, in a sort of dim twilight, produced by myriads of luminous specks
which appeared buzzing confusedly over the surface of the water.
“It is phosphorescence, I suppose,” said Glenarvan.
“No, but phosphorescent insects, positive glow-worms, living diamonds,
which the ladies of Buenos Ayres convert into magnificent ornaments.”
“What!” exclaimed Robert, “those sparks flying about are insects!”
“Yes, my boy.”
Robert caught one in his hand, and found Paganel was right. It was a kind
of large drone, an inch long, and the Indians call it “tuco-tuco.” This curious
specimen of the COLEOPTERA sheds its radiance from two spots in the front
of its breast-plate, and the light is sufficient to read by. Holding his watch
close to the insect, Paganel saw distinctly that the time was 10 P. M.
On rejoining the Major and his three sailors, Glenarvan warned them of the
approaching storm, and advised them to secure themselves in their beds of
branches as firmly as possible, for there was no doubt that after the first clap
of thunder the wind would become unchained, and the OMBU would be
violently shaken. Though they could not defend themselves from the waters
above, they might at least keep out of the rushing current beneath.
They wished one another “good-night,” though hardly daring to hope for it,
and then each one rolled himself in his poncho and lay down to sleep.
But the approach of the great phenomena of nature excites vague
uneasiness in the heart of every sentient being, even in the most strongminded. The whole party in the OMBU felt agitated and oppressed, and not
one of them could close his eyes. The first peal of thunder found them wide
awake. It occurred about 11 P. M., and sounded like a distant rolling.
Glenarvan ventured to creep out of the sheltering foliage, and made his way to
the extremity of the horizontal branch to take a look round.
The deep blackness of the night was already scarified with sharp bright
lines, which were reflected back by the water with unerring exactness. The
clouds had rent in many parts, but noiselessly, like some soft cotton material.
After attentively observing both the zenith and horizon, Glenarvan went back
to the center of the trunk.
“Well, Glenarvan, what’s your report?” asked Paganel.
“I say it is beginning in good earnest, and if it goes on so we shall have a
terrible storm.”
“So much the better,” replied the enthusiastic Paganel; “I should like a
grand exhibition, since we can’t run away.”
“That’s another of your theories,” said the Major.
“And one of my best, McNabbs. I am of Glenarvan’s opinion, that the
storm will be superb. Just a minute ago, when I was trying to sleep, several
facts occurred to my memory, that make me hope it will, for we are in the
region of great electrical tempests. For instance, I have read somewhere, that
in 1793, in this very province of Buenos Ayres, lightning struck thirty-seven
times during one single storm. My colleague, M. Martin de Moussy, counted
fifty-five minutes of uninterrupted rolling.”
“Watch in hand?” asked the Major.
“Watch in hand. Only one thing makes me uneasy,” added Paganel, “if it is
any use to be uneasy, and that is, that the culminating point of this plain, is just
this very OMBU where we are. A lightning conductor would be very
serviceable to us at present. For it is this tree especially, among all that grow in
the Pampas, that the thunder has a particular affection for. Besides, I need not
tell you, friend, that learned men tell us never to take refuge under trees during
a storm.”
“Most seasonable advice, certainly, in our circumstances,” said the Major.
“I must confess, Paganel,” replied Glenarvan, “that you might have chosen
a better time for this reassuring information.”
“Bah!” replied Paganel, “all times are good for getting information. Ha!
now it’s beginning.”
Louder peals of thunder interrupted this inopportune conversation, the
violence increasing with the noise till the whole atmosphere seemed to vibrate
with rapid oscillations.
The incessant flashes of lightning took various forms. Some darted down
perpendicularly from the sky five or six times in the same place in succession.
Others would have excited the interest of a SAVANT to the highest degree, for
though Arago, in his curious statistics, only cites two examples of forked
lightning, it was visible here hundreds of times. Some of the flashes branched
out in a thousand different directions, making coralliform zigzags, and threw
out wonderful jets of arborescent light.
Soon the whole sky from east to north seemed supported by a phosphoric
band of intense brilliancy. This kept increasing by degrees till it overspread the
entire horizon, kindling the clouds which were faithfully mirrored in the
waters as if they were masses of combustible material, beneath, and presented
the appearance of an immense globe of fire, the center of which was the
OMBU.
Glenarvan and his companions gazed silently at this terrifying spectacle.
They could not make their voices heard, but the sheets of white light which
enwrapped them every now and then, revealed the face of one and another,
sometimes the calm features of the Major, sometimes the eager, curious glance
of Paganel, or the energetic face of Glenarvan, and at others, the scared eyes of
the terrified Robert, and the careless looks of the sailors, investing them with a
weird, spectral aspect.
However, as yet, no rain had fallen, and the wind had not risen in the least.
But this state of things was of short duration; before long the cataracts of the
sky burst forth, and came down in vertical streams. As the large drops fell
splashing into the lake, fiery sparks seemed to fly out from the illuminated
surface.
Was the rain the FINALE of the storm? If so, Glenarvan and his
companions would escape scot free, except for a few vigorous douche baths.
No. At the very height of this struggle of the electric forces of the atmosphere,
a large ball of fire appeared suddenly at the extremity of the horizontal parent
branch, as thick as a man’s wrist, and surrounded with black smoke. This ball,
after turning round and round for a few seconds, burst like a bombshell, and
with so much noise that the explosion was distinctly audible above the general
FRACAS. A sulphurous smoke filled the air, and complete silence reigned till
the voice of Tom Austin was heard shouting:
“The tree is on fire.”
Tom was right. In a moment, as if some fireworks were being ignited, the
flame ran along the west side of the OMBU; the dead wood and nests of dried
grass, and the whole sap, which was of a spongy texture, supplied food for its
devouring activity.
The wind had risen now and fanned the flame. It was time to flee, and
Glenarvan and his party hurried away to the eastern side of their refuge, which
was meantime untouched by the fire. They were all silent, troubled, and
terrified, as they watched branch after branch shrivel, and crack, and writhe in
the flame like living serpents, and then drop into the swollen torrent, still red
and gleaming, as it was borne swiftly along on the rapid current. The flames
sometimes rose to a prodigious height, and seemed almost lost in the
atmosphere, and sometimes, beaten down by the hurricane, closely enveloped
the OMBU like a robe of Nessus. Terror seized the entire group. They were
almost suffocated with smoke, and scorched with the unbearable heat, for the
conflagration had already reached the lower branches on their side of the
OMBU. To extinguish it or check its progress was impossible; and they saw
themselves irrevocably condemned to a torturing death, like the victims of
Hindoo divinities.
At last, their situation was absolutely intolerable. Of the two deaths staring
them in the face, they had better choose the less cruel.
“To the water!” exclaimed Glenarvan.
Wilson, who was nearest the flames, had already plunged into the lake, but
next minute he screamed out in the most violent terror:
“Help! Help!”
Austin rushed toward him, and with the assistance of the Major, dragged
him up again on the tree.
“What’s the matter?” they asked.
“Alligators! alligators!” replied Wilson.
The whole foot of the tree appeared to be surrounded by these formidable
animals of the Saurian order. By the glare of the flames, they were
immediately recognized by Paganel, as the ferocious species peculiar to
America, called CAIMANS in the Spanish territories. About ten of them were
there, lashing the water with their powerful tails, and attacking the OMBU
with the long teeth of their lower jaw.
At this sight the unfortunate men gave themselves up to be lost. A frightful
death was in store for them, since they must either be devoured by the fire or
by the caimans. Even the Major said, in a calm voice:
“This is the beginning of the end, now.”
There are circumstances in which men are powerless, when the unchained
elements can only be combated by other elements. Glenarvan gazed with
haggard looks at the fire and water leagued against him, hardly knowing what
deliverance to implore from Heaven.
The violence of the storm had abated, but it had developed in the
atmosphere a considerable quantity of vapors, to which electricity was about
to communicate immense force. An enormous water-spout was gradually
forming in the south—a cone of thick mists, but with the point at the bottom,
and base at the top, linking together the turbulent water and the angry clouds.
This meteor soon began to move forward, turning over and over on itself with
dizzy rapidity, and sweeping up into its center a column of water from the
lake, while its gyratory motions made all the surrounding currents of air rush
toward it.
A few seconds more, and the gigantic water-spout threw itself on the
OMBU, and caught it up in its whirl. The tree shook to its roots. Glenarvan
could fancy the caimans’ teeth were tearing it up from the soil; for as he and
his companions held on, each clinging firmly to the other, they felt the
towering OMBU give way, and the next minute it fell right over with a terrible
hissing noise, as the flaming branches touched the foaming water.
It was the work of an instant. Already the water-spout had passed, to carry
on its destructive work elsewhere. It seemed to empty the lake in its passage,
by continually drawing up the water into itself.
The OMBU now began to drift rapidly along, impelled by wind and
current. All the caimans had taken their departure, except one that was
crawling over the upturned roots, and coming toward the poor refugees with
wide open jaws. But Mulrady, seizing hold of a branch that was half-burned
off, struck the monster such a tremendous blow, that it fell back into the
torrent and disappeared, lashing the water with its formidable tail.
Glenarvan and his companions being thus delivered from the voracious
SAURIANS, stationed themselves on the branches windward of the
conflagration, while the OMBU sailed along like a blazing fire-ship through
the dark night, the flames spreading themselves round like sails before the
breath of the hurricane.
CHAPTER XXVI THE RETURN ON BOARD
For two hours the OMBU navigated the immense lake without reaching
terra firma. The flames which were devouring it had gradually died out. The
chief danger of their frightful passage was thus removed, and the Major went
the length of saying, that he should not be surprised if they were saved after
all.
The direction of the current remained unchanged, always running from
southwest to northeast. Profound darkness had again set in, only illumined
here and there by a parting flash of lightning. The storm was nearly over. The
rain had given place to light mists, which a breath of wind dispersed, and the
heavy masses of cloud had separated, and now streaked the sky in long bands.
The OMBU was borne onward so rapidly by the impetuous torrent, that
anyone might have supposed some powerful locomotive engine was hidden in
its trunk. It seemed likely enough they might continue drifting in this way for
days. About three o’clock in the morning, however, the Major noticed that the
roots were beginning to graze the ground occasionally, and by sounding the
depth of the water with a long branch, Tom Austin found that they were
getting on rising ground. Twenty minutes afterward, the OMBU stopped short
with a violent jolt.
“Land! land!” shouted Paganel, in a ringing tone.
The extremity of the calcined bough had struck some hillock, and never
were sailors more glad; the rock to them was the port.
Already Robert and Wilson had leaped on to the solid plateau with a loud,
joyful hurrah! when a well-known whistle was heard. The gallop of a horse
resounded over the plain, and the tall form of Thalcave emerged from the
darkness.
“Thalcave! Thalcave!” they all cried with one voice.
“Amigos!” replied the Patagonian, who had been waiting for the travelers
here in the same place where the current had landed himself.
As he spoke he lifted up Robert in his arms, and hugged him to his breast,
never imagining that Paganel was hanging on to him. A general and hearty
hand-shaking followed, and everyone rejoiced at seeing their faithful guide
again. Then the Patagonian led the way into the HANGAR of a deserted
ESTANCIA, where there was a good, blazing fire to warm them, and a
substantial meal of fine, juicy slices of venison soon broiling, of which they
did not leave a crumb. When their minds had calmed down a little, and they
were able to reflect on the dangers they had come through from flood, and fire,
and alligators, they could scarcely believe they had escaped.
Thalcave, in a few words, gave Paganel an account of himself since they
parted, entirely ascribing his deliverance to his intrepid horse. Then Paganel
tried to make him understand their new interpretation of the document, and the
consequent hopes they were indulging. Whether the Indian actually
understood his ingenious hypothesis was a question; but he saw that they were
glad and confident, and that was enough for him.
As can easily be imagined, after their compulsory rest on the OMBU, the
travelers were up betimes and ready to start. At eight o’clock they set off. No
means of transport being procurable so far south, they were compelled to
walk. However, it was not more than forty miles now that they had to go, and
Thaouka would not refuse to give a lift occasionally to a tired pedestrian, or
even to a couple at a pinch. In thirty-six hours they might reach the shores of
the Atlantic.
The low-lying tract of marshy ground, still under water, soon lay behind
them, as Thalcave led them upward to the higher plains. Here the Argentine
territory resumed its monotonous aspect. A few clumps of trees, planted by
European hands, might chance to be visible among the pasturage, but quite as
rarely as in Tandil and Tapalquem Sierras. The native trees are only found on
the edge of long prairies and about Cape Corrientes.
Next day, though still fifteen miles distant, the proximity of the ocean was
sensibly felt. The VIRAZON, a peculiar wind, which blows regularly half of
the day and night, bent down the heads of the tall grasses. Thinly planted
woods rose to view, and small tree-like mimosas, bushes of acacia, and tufts of
CURRA-MANTEL. Here and there, shining like pieces of broken glass, were
salinous lagoons, which increased the difficulty of the journey as the travelers
had to wind round them to get past. They pushed on as quickly as possible,
hoping to reach Lake Salado, on the shores of the ocean, the same day; and at
8 P. M., when they found themselves in front of the sand hills two hundred feet
high, which skirt the coast, they were all tolerably tired. But when the long
murmur of the distant ocean fell on their ears, the exhausted men forgot their
fatigue, and ran up the sandhills with surprising agility. But it was getting
quite dark already, and their eager gaze could discover no traces of the
DUNCAN on the gloomy expanse of water that met their sight.
“But she is there, for all that,” exclaimed Glenarvan, “waiting for us, and
running alongside.”
“We shall see her to-morrow,” replied McNabbs.
Tom Austin hailed the invisible yacht, but there was no response. The wind
was very high and the sea rough. The clouds were scudding along from the
west, and the spray of the waves dashed up even to the sand-hills. It was little
wonder, then, if the man on the look-out could neither hear nor make himself
heard, supposing the DUNCAN were there. There was no shelter on the coast
for her, neither bay nor cove, nor port; not so much as a creek. The shore was
composed of sand-banks which ran out into the sea, and were more dangerous
to approach than rocky shoals. The sand-banks irritate the waves, and make
the sea so particularly rough, that in heavy weather vessels that run aground
there are invariably dashed to pieces.
Though, then, the DUNCAN would keep far away from such a coast, John
Mangles is a prudent captain to get near. Tom Austin, however, was of the
opinion that she would be able to keep five miles out.
The Major advised his impatient relative to restrain himself to
circumstances. Since there was no means of dissipating the darkness, what
was the use of straining his eyes by vainly endeavoring to pierce through it.
He set to work immediately to prepare the night’s encampment beneath the
shelter of the sand-hills; the last provisions supplied the last meal, and
afterward, each, following the Major’s example, scooped out a hole in the
sand, which made a comfortable enough bed, and then covered himself with
the soft material up to his chin, and fell into a heavy sleep.
But Glenarvan kept watch. There was still a stiff breeze of wind, and the
ocean had not recovered its equilibrium after the recent storm. The waves, at
all times tumultuous, now broke over the sand-banks with a noise like thunder.
Glenarvan could not rest, knowing the DUNCAN was so near him. As to
supposing she had not arrived at the appointed rendezvous, that was out of the
question. Glenarvan had left the Bay of Talcahuano on the 14th of October,
and arrived on the shores of the Atlantic on the 12th of November. He had
taken thirty days to cross Chili, the Cordilleras, the Pampas, and the Argentine
plains, giving the DUNCAN ample time to double Cape Horn, and arrive on
the opposite side. For such a fast runner there were no impediments. Certainly
the storm had been very violent, and its fury must have been terrible on such a
vast battlefield as the Atlantic, but the yacht was a good ship, and the captain
was a good sailor. He was bound to be there, and he would be there.
These reflections, however, did not calm Glenarvan. When the heart and
the reason are struggling, it is generally the heart that wins the mastery. The
laird of Malcolm Castle felt the presence of loved ones about him in the
darkness as he wandered up and down the lonely strand. He gazed, and
listened, and even fancied he caught occasional glimpses of a faint light.
“I am not mistaken,” he said to himself; “I saw a ship’s light, one of the
lights on the DUNCAN! Oh! why can’t I see in the dark?”
All at once the thought rushed across him that Paganel said he was a
nyctalope, and could see at night. He must go and wake him.
The learned geographer was sleeping as sound as a mole. A strong arm
pulled him up out of the sand and made him call out:
“Who goes there?”
“It is I, Paganel.”
“Who?”
“Glenarvan. Come, I need your eyes.”
“My eyes,” replied Paganel, rubbing them vigorously.
“Yes, I need your eyes to make out the DUNCAN in this darkness, so
come.”
“Confound the nyctalopia!” said Paganel, inwardly, though delighted to be
of any service to his friend.
He got up and shook his stiffened limbs, and stretching and yawning as
most people do when roused from sleep, followed Glenarvan to the beach.
Glenarvan begged him to examine the distant horizon across the sea, which
he did most conscientiously for some minutes.
“Well, do you see nothing?” asked Glenarvan.
“Not a thing. Even a cat couldn’t see two steps before her.”
“Look for a red light or a green one—her larboard or starboard light.”
“I see neither a red nor a green light, all is pitch dark,” replied Paganel, his
eyes involuntarily beginning to close.
For half an hour he followed his impatient friend, mechanically letting his
head frequently drop on his chest, and raising it again with a start. At last he
neither answered nor spoke, and he reeled about like a drunken man.
Glenarvan looked at him, and found he was sound asleep!
Without attempting to wake him, he took his arm, led him back to his hole,
and buried him again comfortably.
At dawn next morning, all the slumberers started to their feet and rushed to
the shore, shouting “Hurrah, hurrah!” as Lord Glenarvan’s loud cry, “The
DUNCAN, the DUNCAN!” broke upon his ear.
There she was, five miles out, her courses carefully reefed, and her steam
half up. Her smoke was lost in the morning mist. The sea was so violent that a
vessel of her tonnage could not have ventured safely nearer the sand-banks.
Glenarvan, by the aid of Paganel’s telescope, closely observed the
movements of the yacht. It was evident that John Mangles had not perceived
his passengers, for he continued his course as before.
But at this very moment Thalcave fired his carbine in the direction of the
yacht. They listened and looked, but no signal of recognition was returned. A
second and a third time the Indian fired, awakening the echoes among the
sand-hills.
At last a white smoke was seen issuing from the side of the yacht.
“They see us!” exclaimed Glenarvan. “That’s the cannon of the
DUNCAN.”
A few seconds, and the heavy boom of the cannon came across the water
and died away on the shore. The sails were instantly altered, and the steam got
up, so as to get as near the coast as possible.
Presently, through the glass, they saw a boat lowered.
“Lady Helena will not be able to come,” said Tom Austin. “It is too
rough.”
“Nor John Mangles,” added McNabbs; “he cannot leave the ship.”
“My sister, my sister!” cried Robert, stretching out his arms toward the
yacht, which was now rolling violently.
“Oh, how I wish I could get on board!” said Glenarvan.
“Patience, Edward! you will be there in a couple of hours,” replied the
Major.
Two hours! But it was impossible for a boat—a six-oared one—to come
and go in a shorter space of time.
Glenarvan went back to Thalcave, who stood beside Thaouka, with his
arms crossed, looking quietly at the troubled waves.
Glenarvan took his hand, and pointing to the yacht, said: “Come!”
The Indian gently shook his head.
“Come, friend,” repeated Glenarvan.
“No,” said Thalcave, gently. “Here is Thaouka, and there—the Pampas,”
he added, embracing with a passionate gesture the wide-stretching prairies.
Glenarvan understood his refusal. He knew that the Indian would never
forsake the prairie, where the bones of his fathers were whitening, and he
knew the religious attachment of these sons of the desert for their native land.
He did not urge Thalcave longer, therefore, but simply pressed his hand. Nor
could he find it in his heart to insist, when the Indian, smiling as usual, would
not accept the price of his services, pushing back the money, and saying:
“For the sake of friendship.”
Glenarvan could not reply; but he wished at least, to leave the brave fellow
some souvenir of his European friends. What was there to give, however?
Arms, horses, everything had been destroyed in the unfortunate inundation,
and his friends were no richer than himself.
He was quite at a loss how to show his recognition of the disinterestedness
of this noble guide, when a happy thought struck him. He had an exquisite
portrait of Lady Helena in his pocket, a CHEF-D’OEUVRE of Lawrence. This
he drew out, and offered to Thalcave, simply saying:
“My wife.”
The Indian gazed at it with a softened eye, and said:
“Good and beautiful.”
Then Robert, and Paganel, and the Major, and the rest, exchanged touching
farewells with the faithful Patagonian. Thalcave embraced them each, and
pressed them to his broad chest. Paganel made him accept a map of South
America and the two oceans, which he had often seen the Indian looking at
with interest. It was the most precious thing the geographer possessed. As for
Robert, he had only caresses to bestow, and these he lavished on his friend, not
forgetting to give a share to Thaouka.
The boat from the DUNCAN was now fast approaching, and in another
minute had glided into a narrow channel between the sand-banks, and run
ashore.
“My wife?” were Glenarvan’s first words.
“My sister?” said Robert.
“Lady Helena and Miss Grant are waiting for you on board,” replied the
coxswain; “but lose no time your honor, we have not a minute, for the tide is
beginning to ebb already.”
The last kindly adieux were spoken, and Thalcave accompanied his friends
to the boat, which had been pushed back into the water. Just as Robert was
going to step in, the Indian took him in his arms, and gazed tenderly into his
face. Then he said:
“Now go. You are a man.”
“Good-by, good-by, friend!” said Glenarvan, once more.
“Shall we never see each other again?” Paganel called out.
“Quien sabe?” (Who knows?) replied Thalcave, lifting his arms toward
heaven.
These were the Indian’s last words, dying away on the breeze, as the boat
receded gradually from the shore. For a long time, his dark, motionless
SILHOUETTE stood out against the sky, through the white, dashing spray of
the waves. Then by degrees his tall form began to diminish in size, till at last
his friends of a day lost sight of him altogether.
An hour afterward Robert was the first to leap on board the DUNCAN. He
flung his arms round Mary’s neck, amid the loud, joyous hurrahs of the crew
on the yacht.
Thus the journey across South America was accomplished, the given line
of march being scrupulously adhered to throughout.
Neither mountains nor rivers had made the travelers change their course;
and though they had not had to encounter any ill-will from men, their generous
intrepidity had been often enough roughly put to the proof by the fury of the
unchained elements.
END OF BOOK ONE
AUSTRALIA
CHAPTER I A NEW DESTINATION
For the first few moments the joy of reunion completely filled the hearts.
Lord Glenarvan had taken care that the ill-success of their expedition should
not throw a gloom over the pleasure of meeting, his very first words being:
“Cheer up, friends, cheer up! Captain Grant is not with us, but we have a
certainty of finding him!”
Only such an assurance as this would have restored hope to those on board
the DUNCAN. Lady Helena and Mary Grant had been sorely tried by the
suspense, as they stood on the poop waiting for the arrival of the boat, and
trying to count the number of its passengers. Alternate hope and fear agitated
the bosom of poor Mary. Sometimes she fancied she could see her father,
Harry Grant, and sometimes she gave way to despair. Her heart throbbed
violently; she could not speak, and indeed could scarcely stand. Lady Helena
put her arm round her waist to support her, but the captain, John Mangles, who
stood close beside them spoke no encouraging word, for his practiced eye saw
plainly that the captain was not there.
“He is there! He is coming! Oh, father!” exclaimed the young girl. But as
the boat came nearer, her illusion was dispelled; all hope forsook her, and she
would have sunk in despair, but for the reassuring voice of Glenarvan.
After their mutual embraces were over, Lady Helena, and Mary Grant, and
John Mangles, were informed of the principal incidents of the expedition, and
especially of the new interpretation of the document, due to the sagacity of
Jacques Paganel. His Lordship also spoke in the most eulogistic terms of
Robert, of whom Mary might well be proud. His courage and devotion, and
the dangers he had run, were all shown up in strong relief by his patron, till the
modest boy did not know which way to look, and was obliged to hide his
burning cheeks in his sister’s arms.
“No need to blush, Robert,” said John Mangles. “Your conduct has been
worthy of your name.” And he leaned over the boy and pressed his lips on his
cheek, still wet with Mary’s tears.
The Major and Paganel, it need hardly be said, came in for their due share
of welcome, and Lady Helena only regretted she could not shake hands with
the brave and generous Thalcave. McNabbs soon slipped away to his cabin,
and began to shave himself as coolly and composedly as possible; while
Paganel flew here and there, like a bee sipping the sweets of compliments and
smiles. He wanted to embrace everyone on board the yacht, and beginning
with Lady Helena and Mary Grant, wound up with M. Olbinett, the steward,
who could only acknowledge so polite an attention by announcing that
breakfast was ready.
“Breakfast!” exclaimed Paganel.
“Yes, Monsieur Paganel.”
“A real breakfast, on a real table, with a cloth and napkins?”
“Certainly, Monsieur Paganel.”
“And we shall neither have CHARQUI, nor hard eggs, nor fillets of
ostrich?”
“Oh, Monsieur,” said Olbinett in an aggrieved tone.
“I don’t want to hurt your feelings, my friend,” said the geographer
smiling. “But for a month that has been our usual bill of fare, and when we
dined we stretched ourselves full length on the ground, unless we sat astride
on the trees. Consequently, the meal you have just announced seemed to me
like a dream, or fiction, or chimera.”
“Well, Monsieur Paganel, come along and let us prove its reality,” said
Lady Helena, who could not help laughing.
“Take my arm,” replied the gallant geographer.
“Has his Lordship any orders to give me about the DUNCAN?” asked
John Mangles.
“After breakfast, John,” replied Glenarvan, “we’ll discuss the program of
our new expedition en famille.”
M. Olbinett’s breakfast seemed quite a FETE to the hungry guests. It was
pronounced excellent, and even superior to the festivities of the Pampas.
Paganel was helped twice to each dish, through “absence of mind,” he said.
This unlucky word reminded Lady Helena of the amiable Frenchman’s
propensity, and made her ask if he had ever fallen into his old habits while
they were away. The Major and Glenarvan exchanged smiling glances, and
Paganel burst out laughing, and protested on his honor that he would never be
caught tripping again once more during the whole voyage. After this prelude,
he gave an amusing recital of his disastrous mistake in learning Spanish, and
his profound study of Camoens. “After all,” he added, “it’s an ill wind that
blows nobody good, and I don’t regret the mistake.”
“Why not, my worthy friend?” asked the Major.
“Because I not only know Spanish, but Portuguese. I can speak two
languages instead of one.”
“Upon my word, I never thought of that,” said McNabbs. “My
compliments, Paganel—my sincere compliments.”
But Paganel was too busily engaged with his knife and fork to lose a single
mouthful, though he did his best to eat and talk at the same time. He was so
much taken up with his plate, however, that one little fact quite escaped his
observation, though Glenarvan noticed it at once. This was, that John Mangles
had grown particularly attentive to Mary Grant. A significant glance from
Lady Helena told him, moreover, how affairs stood, and inspired him with
affectionate sympathy for the young lovers; but nothing of this was apparent in
his manner to John, for his next question was what sort of a voyage he had
made.
“We could not have had a better; but I must apprise your Lordship that I
did not go through the Straits of Magellan again.”
“What! you doubled Cape Horn, and I was not there!” exclaimed Paganel.
“Hang yourself!” said the Major.
“Selfish fellow! you advise me to do that because you want my rope,”
retorted the geographer.
“Well, you see, my dear Paganel, unless you have the gift of ubiquity you
can’t be in two places at once. While you were scouring the pampas you could
not be doubling Cape Horn.”
“That doesn’t prevent my regretting it,” replied Paganel.
Here the subject dropped, and John continued his account of his voyage.
On arriving at Cape Pilares he had found the winds dead against him, and
therefore made for the south, coasting along the Desolation Isle, and after
going as far as the sixty-seventh degree southern latitude, had doubled Cape
Horn, passed by Terra del Fuego and the Straits of Lemaire, keeping close to
the Patagonian shore. At Cape Corrientes they encountered the terrible storm
which had handled the travelers across the pampas so roughly, but the yacht
had borne it bravely, and for the last three days had stood right out to sea, till
the welcome signal-gun of the expedition was heard announcing the arrival of
the anxiously-looked-for party. “It was only justice,” the captain added, “that
he should mention the intrepid bearing of Lady Helena and Mary Grant
throughout the whole hurricane. They had not shown the least fear, unless for
their friends, who might possibly be exposed to the fury of the tempest.”
After John Mangles had finished his narrative, Glenarvan turned to Mary
and said; “My dear Miss Mary, the captain has been doing homage to your
noble qualities, and I am glad to think you are not unhappy on board his ship.”
“How could I be?” replied Mary naively, looking at Lady Helena, and at
the young captain too, likely enough.
“Oh, my sister is very fond of you, Mr. John, and so am I,” exclaimed
Robert.
“And so am I of you, my dear boy,” returned the captain, a little abashed
by Robert’s innocent avowal, which had kindled a faint blush on Mary’s
cheek. Then he managed to turn the conversation to safer topics by saying:
“And now that your Lordship has heard all about the doings of the DUNCAN,
perhaps you will give us some details of your own journey, and tell us more
about the exploits of our young hero.”
Nothing could be more agreeable than such a recital to Lady Helena and
Mary Grant; and accordingly Lord Glenarvan hastened to satisfy their
curiosity—going over incident by incident, the entire march from one ocean to
another, the pass of the Andes, the earthquake, the disappearance of Robert,
his capture by the condor, Thalcave’s providential shot, the episode of the red
wolves, the devotion of the young lad, Sergeant Manuel, the inundations, the
caimans, the waterspout, the night on the Atlantic shore—all these details,
amusing or terrible, excited by turns laughter and horror in the listeners. Often
and often Robert came in for caresses from his sister and Lady Helena. Never
was a boy so much embraced, or by such enthusiastic friends.
“And now, friends,” added Lord Glenarvan, when he had finished his
narrative, “we must think of the present. The past is gone, but the future is
ours. Let us come back to Captain Harry Grant.”
As soon as breakfast was over they all went into Lord Glenarvan’s private
cabin and seated themselves round a table covered with charts and plans, to
talk over the matter fully.
“My dear Helena,” said Lord Glenarvan, “I told you, when we came on
board a little while ago, that though we had not brought back Captain Grant,
our hope of finding him was stronger than ever. The result of our journey
across America is this: We have reached the conviction, or rather absolute
certainty, that the shipwreck never occurred on the shores of the Atlantic nor
Pacific. The natural inference is that, as far as regards Patagonia, our
interpretation of the document was erroneous. Most fortunately, our friend
Paganel, in a happy moment of inspiration, discovered the mistake. He has
proved clearly that we have been on the wrong track, and so explained the
document that all doubt whatever is removed from our minds. However, as the
document is in French, I will ask Paganel to go over it for your benefit.”
The learned geographer, thus called upon, executed his task in the most
convincing manner, descanting on the syllables GONIE and INDI, and
extracting AUSTRALIA out of AUSTRAL. He pointed out that Captain
Grant, on leaving the coast of Peru to return to Europe, might have been
carried away with his disabled ship by the southern currents of the Pacific
right to the shores of Australia, and his hypotheses were so ingenious and his
deductions so subtle that even the matter-of-fact John Mangles, a difficult
judge, and most unlikely to be led away by any flights of imagination, was
completely satisfied.
At the conclusion of Paganel’s dissertation, Glenarvan announced that the
DUNCAN would sail immediately for Australia.
But before the decisive orders were given, McNabbs asked for a few
minutes’ hearing.
“Say away, McNabbs,” replied Glenarvan.
“I have no intention of weakening the arguments of my friend Paganel, and
still less of refuting them. I consider them wise and weighty, and deserving our
attention, and think them justly entitled to form the basis of our future
researches. But still I should like them to be submitted to a final examination,
in order to make their worth incontestable and uncontested.”
“Go on, Major,” said Paganel; “I am ready to answer all your questions.”
“They are simple enough, as you will see. Five months ago, when we left
the Clyde, we had studied these same documents, and their interpretation then
appeared quite plain. No other coast but the western coast of Patagonia could
possibly, we thought, have been the scene of the shipwreck. We had not even
the shadow of a doubt on the subject.”
“That’s true,” replied Glenarvan.
“A little later,” continued the Major, “when a providential fit of absence of
mind came over Paganel, and brought him on board the yacht, the documents
were submitted to him and he approved our plan of search most unreservedly.”
“I do not deny it,” said Paganel.
“And yet we were mistaken,” resumed the Major.
“Yes, we were mistaken,” returned Paganel; “but it is only human to make
a mistake, while to persist in it, a man must be a fool.”
“Stop, Paganel, don’t excite yourself; I don’t mean to say that we should
prolong our search in America.”
“What is it, then, that you want?” asked Glenarvan.
“A confession, nothing more. A confession that Australia now as evidently
appears to be the theater of the shipwreck of the BRITANNIA as America did
before.”
“We confess it willingly,” replied Paganel.
“Very well, then, since that is the case, my advice is not to let your
imagination rely on successive and contradictory evidence. Who knows
whether after Australia some other country may not appear with equal
certainty to be the place, and we may have to recommence our search?”
Glenarvan and Paganel looked at each other silently, struck by the justice
of these remarks.
“I should like you, therefore,” continued the Major, “before we actually
start for Australia, to make one more examination of the documents. Here they
are, and here are the charts. Let us take up each point in succession through
which the 37th parallel passes, and see if we come across any other country
which would agree with the precise indications of the document.”
“Nothing can be more easily and quickly done,” replied Paganel; “for
countries are not very numerous in this latitude, happily.”
“Well, look,” said the Major, displaying an English planisphere on the plan
of Mercator’s Chart, and presenting the appearance of a terrestrial globe.
He placed it before Lady Helena, and then they all stood round, so as to be
able to follow the argument of Paganel.
“As I have said already,” resumed the learned geographer, “after having
crossed South America, the 37th degree of latitude cuts the islands of Tristan
d’Acunha. Now I maintain that none of the words of the document could relate
to these islands.”
The documents were examined with the most minute care, and the
conclusion unanimously reached was that these islands were entirely out of the
question.
“Let us go on then,” resumed Paganel. “After leaving the Atlantic, we pass
two degrees below the Cape of Good Hope, and into the Indian Ocean. Only
one group of islands is found on this route, the Amsterdam Isles. Now, then,
we must examine these as we did the Tristan d’Acunha group.”
After a close survey, the Amsterdam Isles were rejected in their turn. Not a
single word, or part of a word, French, English or German, could apply to this
group in the Indian Ocean.
“Now we come to Australia,” continued Paganel.
“The 37th parallel touches this continent at Cape Bernouilli, and leaves it
at Twofold Bay. You will agree with me that, without straining the text, the
English word STRA and the French one AUSTRAL may relate to Australia.
The thing is too plain to need proof.”
The conclusion of Paganel met with unanimous approval; every probability
was in his favor.
“And where is the next point?” asked McNabbs.
“That is easily answered. After leaving Twofold Bay, we cross an arm of
the sea which extends to New Zealand. Here I must call your attention to the
fact that the French word CONTIN means a continent, irrefragably. Captain
Grant could not, then, have found refuge in New Zealand, which is only an
island. However that may be though, examine and compare, and go over and
over each word, and see if, by any possibility, they can be made to fit this new
country.”
“In no way whatever,” replied John Mangles, after a minute investigation
of the documents and the planisphere.
“No,” chimed in all the rest, and even the Major himself, “it cannot apply
to New Zealand.”
“Now,” went on Paganel, “in all this immense space between this large
island and the American coast, there is only one solitary barren little island
crossed by the 37th parallel.”
“And what is its name,” asked the Major.
“Here it is, marked in the map. It is Maria Theresa—a name of which there
is not a single trace in either of the three documents.”
“Not the slightest,” said Glenarvan.
“I leave you, then, my friends, to decide whether all these probabilities, not
to say certainties, are not in favor of the Australian continent.”
“Evidently,” replied the captain and all the others.
“Well, then, John,” said Glenarvan, “the next question is, have you
provisions and coal enough?”
“Yes, your honor, I took in an ample store at Talcahuano, and, besides, we
can easily replenish our stock of coal at Cape Town.”
“Well, then, give orders.”
“Let me make one more observation,” interrupted McNabbs.
“Go on then.”
“Whatever likelihood of success Australia may offer us, wouldn’t it be
advisable to stop a day or two at the Tristan d’Acunha Isles and the
Amsterdam? They lie in our route, and would not take us the least out of the
way. Then we should be able to ascertain if the BRITANNIA had left any
traces of her shipwreck there?”
“Incredulous Major!” exclaimed Paganel, “he still sticks to his idea.”
“I stick to this any way, that I don’t want to have to retrace our steps,
supposing that Australia should disappoint our sanguine hopes.”
“It seems to me a good precaution,” replied Glenarvan.
“And I’m not the one to dissuade you from it,” returned Paganel; “quite the
contrary.”
“Steer straight for Tristan d’Acunha.”
“Immediately, your Honor,” replied the captain, going on deck, while
Robert and Mary Grant overwhelmed Lord Glenarvan with their grateful
thanks.
Shortly after, the DUNCAN had left the American coast, and was running
eastward, her sharp keel rapidly cutting her way through the waves of the
Atlantic Ocean.
CHAPTER II TRISTAN D’ACUNHA AND THE ISLE OF
AMSTERDAM
If the yacht had followed the line of the equator, the 196 degrees which
separate Australia from America, or, more correctly, Cape Bernouilli from
Cape Corrientes, would have been equal to 11,760 geographical miles; but
along the 37th parallel these same degrees, owing to the form of the earth,
only represent 9,480 miles. From the American coast to Tristan d’Acunha is
reckoned 2,100 miles—a distance which John Mangles hoped to clear in ten
days, if east winds did not retard the motion of the yacht. But he was not long
uneasy on that score, for toward evening the breeze sensibly lulled and then
changed altogether, giving the DUNCAN a fair field on a calm sea for
displaying her incomparable qualities as a sailor.
The passengers had fallen back into their ordinary ship life, and it hardly
seemed as if they really could have been absent a whole month. Instead of the
Pacific, the Atlantic stretched itself out before them, and there was scarcely a
shade of difference in the waves of the two oceans. The elements, after having
handled them so roughly, seemed now disposed to favor them to the utmost.
The sea was tranquil, and the wind kept in the right quarter, so that the yacht
could spread all her canvas, and lend its aid, if needed to the indefatigable
steam stored up in the boiler.
Under such conditions, the voyage was safely and rapidly accomplished.
Their confidence increased as they found themselves nearer the Australian
coast. They began to talk of Captain Grant as if the yacht were going to take
him on board at a given port. His cabin was got ready, and berths for the men.
This cabin was next to the famous number six, which Paganel had taken
possession of instead of the one he had booked on the SCOTIA. It had been
till now occupied by M. Olbinett, who vacated it for the expected guest. Mary
took great delight in arranging it with her own hands, and adorning it for the
reception of the loved inmate.
The learned geographer kept himself closely shut up. He was working
away from morning till night at a work entitled “Sublime Impressions of a
Geographer in the Argentine Pampas,” and they could hear him repeating
elegant periods aloud before committing them to the white pages of his daybook; and more than once, unfaithful to Clio, the muse of history, he invoked
in his transports the divine Calliope, the muse of epic poetry.
Paganel made no secret of it either. The chaste daughters of Apollo
willingly left the slopes of Helicon and Parnassus at his call. Lady Helena paid
him sincere compliments on his mythological visitants, and so did the Major,
though he could not forbear adding:
“But mind no fits of absence of mind, my dear Paganel; and if you take a
fancy to learn Australian, don’t go and study it in a Chinese grammar.”
Things went on perfectly smoothly on board. Lady Helena and Lord
Glenarvan found leisure to watch John Mangles’ growing attachment to Mary
Grant. There was nothing to be said against it, and, indeed, since John
remained silent, it was best to take no notice of it.
“What will Captain Grant think?” Lord Glenarvan asked his wife one day.
“He’ll think John is worthy of Mary, my dear Edward, and he’ll think
right.”
Meanwhile, the yacht was making rapid progress. Five days after losing
sight of Cape Corrientes, on the 16th of November, they fell in with fine
westerly breezes, and the DUNCAN might almost have dispensed with her
screw altogether, for she flew over the water like a bird, spreading all her sails
to catch the breeze, as if she were running a race with the Royal Thames Club
yachts.
Next day, the ocean appeared covered with immense seaweeds, looking
like a great pond choked up with the DEBRIS of trees and plants torn off the
neighboring continents. Commander Murray had specially pointed them out to
the attention of navigators. The DUNCAN appeared to glide over a long
prairie, which Paganel justly compared to the Pampas, and her speed
slackened a little.
Twenty-four hours after, at break of day, the man on the look-out was
heard calling out, “Land ahead!”
“In what direction?” asked Tom Austin, who was on watch.
“Leeward!” was the reply.
This exciting cry brought everyone speedily on deck. Soon a telescope
made its appearance, followed by Jacques Paganel. The learned geographer
pointed the instrument in the direction indicated, but could see nothing that
resembled land.
“Look in the clouds,” said John Mangles.
“Ah, now I do see a sort of peak, but very indistinctly.”
“It is Tristan d’Acunha,” replied John Mangles.
“Then, if my memory serves me right, we must be eighty miles from it, for
the peak of Tristan, seven thousand feet high, is visible at that distance.”
“That’s it, precisely.”
Some hours later, the sharp, lofty crags of the group of islands stood out
clearly on the horizon. The conical peak of Tristan looked black against the
bright sky, which seemed all ablaze with the splendor of the rising sun. Soon
the principal island stood out from the rocky mass, at the summit of a triangle
inclining toward the northeast.
Tristan d’Acunha is situated in 37 degrees 8’ of southern latitude, and 10
degrees 44’ of longitude west of the meridian at Greenwich. Inaccessible
Island is eighteen miles to the southwest and Nightingale Island is ten miles to
the southeast, and this completes the little solitary group of islets in the
Atlantic Ocean. Toward noon, the two principal landmarks, by which the
group is recognized were sighted, and at 3 P. M. the DUNCAN entered
Falmouth Bay in Tristan d’Acunha.
Several whaling vessels were lying quietly at anchor there, for the coast
abounds in seals and other marine animals.
John Mangle’s first care was to find good anchorage, and then all the
passengers, both ladies and gentlemen, got into the long boat and were rowed
ashore. They stepped out on a beach covered with fine black sand, the
impalpable DEBRIS of the calcined rocks of the island.
Tristan d’Acunha is the capital of the group, and consists of a little village,
lying in the heart of the bay, and watered by a noisy, rapid stream. It contained
about fifty houses, tolerably clean, and disposed with geometrical regularity.
Behind this miniature town there lay 1,500 hectares of meadow land, bounded
by an embankment of lava. Above this embankment, the conical peak rose
7,000 feet high.
Lord Glenarvan was received by a governor supplied from the English
colony at the Cape. He inquired at once respecting Harry Grant and the
BRITANNIA, and found the names entirely unknown. The Tristan d’Acunha
Isles are out of the route of ships, and consequently little frequented. Since the
wreck of the Blendon Hall in 1821, on the rocks of Inaccessible Island, two
vessels have stranded on the chief island—the PRIMANGUET in 1845, and
the three-mast American, PHILADELPHIA, in 1857. These three events
comprise the whole catalogue of maritime disasters in the annals of the
Acunhas.
Lord Glenarvan did not expect to glean any information, and only asked by
the way of duty. He even sent the boats to make the circuit of the island, the
entire extent of which was not more than seventeen miles at most.
In the interim the passengers walked about the village. The population
does not exceed 150 inhabitants, and consists of English and Americans,
married to negroes and Cape Hottentots, who might bear away the palm for
ugliness. The children of these heterogeneous households are very
disagreeable compounds of Saxon stiffness and African blackness.
It was nearly nightfall before the party returned to the yacht, chattering and
admiring the natural riches displayed on all sides, for even close to the streets
of the capital, fields of wheat and maize were waving, and crops of vegetables,
imported forty years before; and in the environs of the village, herds of cattle
and sheep were feeding.
The boats returned to the DUNCAN about the same time as Lord
Glenarvan. They had made the circuit of the entire island in a few hours, but
without coming across the least trace of the BRITANNIA. The only result of
this voyage of circumnavigation was to strike out the name of Isle Tristan
from the program of search.
CHAPTER III CAPE TOWN AND M. VIOT
As John Mangles intended to put in at the Cape of Good Hope for coals, he
was obliged to deviate a little from the 37th parallel, and go two degrees north.
In less than six days he cleared the thirteen hundred miles which separate the
point of Africa from Tristan d’Acunha, and on the 24th of November, at 3 P.
M. the Table Mountain was sighted. At eight o’clock they entered the bay, and
cast anchor in the port of Cape Town. They sailed away next morning at
daybreak.
Between the Cape and Amsterdam Island there is a distance of 2,900
miles, but with a good sea and favoring breeze, this was only a ten day’s
voyage. The elements were now no longer at war with the travelers, as on their
journey across the Pampas—air and water seemed in league to help them
forward.
“Ah! the sea! the sea!” exclaimed Paganel, “it is the field par excellence
for the exercise of human energies, and the ship is the true vehicle of
civilization. Think, my friends, if the globe had been only an immense
continent, the thousandth part of it would still be unknown to us, even in this
nineteenth century. See how it is in the interior of great countries. In the
steppes of Siberia, in the plains of Central Asia, in the deserts of Africa, in the
prairies of America, in the immense wilds of Australia, in the icy solitudes of
the Poles, man scarcely dares to venture; the most daring shrinks back, the
most courageous succumbs. They cannot penetrate them; the means of
transport are insufficient, and the heat and disease, and savage disposition of
the natives, are impassable obstacles. Twenty miles of desert separate men
more than five hundred miles of ocean.”
Paganel spoke with such warmth that even the Major had nothing to say
against this panegyric of the ocean. Indeed, if the finding of Harry Grant had
involved following a parallel across continents instead of oceans, the
enterprise could not have been attempted; but the sea was there ready to carry
the travelers from one country to another, and on the 6th of December, at the
first streak of day, they saw a fresh mountain apparently emerging from the
bosom of the waves.
This was Amsterdam Island, situated in 37 degrees 47 minutes latitude and
77 degrees 24 minutes longitude, the high cone of which in clear weather is
visible fifty miles off. At eight o’clock, its form, indistinct though it still was,
seemed almost a reproduction of Teneriffe.
“And consequently it must resemble Tristan d’Acunha,” observed
Glenarvan.
“A very wise conclusion,” said Paganel, “according to the geometrographic
axiom that two islands resembling a third must have a common likeness. I will
only add that, like Tristan d’Acunha, Amsterdam Island is equally rich in seals
and Robinsons.”
“There are Robinsons everywhere, then?” said Lady Helena.
“Indeed, Madam,” replied Paganel, “I know few islands without some tale
of the kind appertaining to them, and the romance of your immortal
countryman, Daniel Defoe, has been often enough realized before his day.”
“Monsieur Paganel,” said Mary, “may I ask you a question?”
“Two if you like, my dear young lady, and I promise to answer them.”
“Well, then, I want to know if you would be very much frightened at the
idea of being cast away alone on a desert island.”
“I?” exclaimed Paganel.
“Come now, my good fellow,” said the Major, “don’t go and tell us that it
is your most cherished desire.”
“I don’t pretend it is that, but still, after all, such an adventure would not be
very unpleasant to me. I should begin a new life; I should hunt and fish; I
should choose a grotto for my domicile in Winter and a tree in Summer. I
should make storehouses for my harvests: in one word, I should colonize my
island.”
“All by yourself?”
“All by myself if I was obliged. Besides, are we ever obliged? Cannot one
find friends among the animals, and choose some tame kid or eloquent parrot
or amiable monkey? And if a lucky chance should send one a companion like
the faithful Friday, what more is needed? Two friends on a rock, there is
happiness. Suppose now, the Major and I—”
“Thank you,” replied the Major, interrupting him; “I have no inclination in
that line, and should make a very poor Robinson Crusoe.”
“My dear Monsieur Paganel,” said Lady Helena, “you are letting your
imagination run away with you, as usual. But the dream is very different from
the reality. You are thinking of an imaginary Robinson’s life, thrown on a
picked island and treated like a spoiled child by nature. You only see the sunny
side.”
“What, madam! You don’t believe a man could be happy on a desert
island?”
“I do not. Man is made for society and not for solitude, and solitude can
only engender despair. It is a question of time. At the outset it is quite possible
that material wants and the very necessities of existence may engross the poor
shipwrecked fellow, just snatched from the waves; but afterward, when he
feels himself alone, far from his fellow men, without any hope of seeing
country and friends again, what must he think, what must he suffer? His little
island is all his world. The whole human race is shut up in himself, and when
death comes, which utter loneliness will make terrible, he will be like the last
man on the last day of the world. Believe me, Monsieur Paganel, such a man is
not to be envied.”
Paganel gave in, though regretfully, to the arguments of Lady Helena, and
still kept up a discussion on the advantages and disadvantages of Isolation, till
the very moment the DUNCAN dropped anchor about a mile off Amsterdam
Island.
This lonely group in the Indian Ocean consists of two distinct islands,
thirty-three miles apart, and situated exactly on the meridian of the Indian
peninsula. To the north is Amsterdam Island, and to the south St. Paul; but
they have been often confounded by geographers and navigators.
At the time of the DUNCAN’S visit to the island, the population consisted
of three people, a Frenchman and two mulattoes, all three employed by the
merchant proprietor. Paganel was delighted to shake hands with a countryman
in the person of good old Monsieur Viot. He was far advanced in years, but
did the honors of the place with much politeness. It was a happy day for him
when these kindly strangers touched at his island, for St. Peter’s was only
frequented by seal-fishers, and now and then a whaler, the crews of which are
usually rough, coarse men.
M. Viot presented his subjects, the two mulattoes. They composed the
whole living population of the island, except a few wild boars in the interior
and myriads of penguins. The little house where the three solitary men lived
was in the heart of a natural bay on the southeast, formed by the crumbling
away of a portion of the mountain.
Twice over in the early part of the century, Amsterdam Island became the
country of deserted sailors, providentially saved from misery and death; but
since these events no vessel had been lost on its coast. Had any shipwreck
occurred, some fragments must have been thrown on the sandy shore, and any
poor sufferers from it would have found their way to M. Viot’s fishing-huts.
The old man had been long on the island, and had never been called upon to
exercise such hospitality. Of the BRITANNIA and Captain Grant he knew
nothing, but he was certain that the disaster had not happened on Amsterdam
Island, nor on the islet called St. Paul, for whalers and fishing-vessels went
there constantly, and must have heard of it.
Glenarvan was neither surprised nor vexed at the reply; indeed, his object
in asking was rather to establish the fact that Captain Grant had not been there
than that he had. This done, they were ready to proceed on their voyage next
day.
They rambled about the island till evening, as its appearance was very
inviting. Its FAUNA and FLORA, however, were poor in the extreme. The
only specimens of quadrupeds, birds, fish and cetacea were a few wild boars,
stormy petrels, albatrosses, perch and seals. Here and there thermal springs
and chalybeate waters escaped from the black lava, and thin dark vapors rose
above the volcanic soil. Some of these springs were very hot. John Mangles
held his thermometer in one of them, and found the temperature was 176
degrees Fahrenheit. Fish caught in the sea a few yards off, cooked in five
minutes in these all but boiling waters, a fact which made Paganel resolve not
to attempt to bathe in them.
Toward evening, after a long promenade, Glenarvan and his party bade
adieu to the good old M. Viot, and returned to the yacht, wishing him all the
happiness possible on his desert island, and receiving in return the old man’s
blessing on their expedition.
CHAPTER IV A WAGER AND HOW DECIDED
On the 7th of December, at three A. M., the DUNCAN lay puffing out her
smoke in the little harbor ready to start, and a few minutes afterward the
anchor was lifted, and the screw set in motion. By eight o’clock, when the
passengers came on deck, the Amsterdam Island had almost disappeared from
view behind the mists of the horizon. This was the last halting-place on the
route, and nothing now was between them and the Australian coast but three
thousand miles’ distance. Should the west wind continue but a dozen days
longer, and the sea remain favorable, the yacht would have reached the end of
her voyage.
Mary Grant and her brother could not gaze without emotion at the waves
through which the DUNCAN was speeding her course, when they thought that
these very same waves must have dashed against the prow of the BRITANNIA
but a few days before her shipwreck. Here, perhaps, Captain Grant, with a
disabled ship and diminished crew, had struggled against the tremendous
hurricanes of the Indian Ocean, and felt himself driven toward the coast with
irresistible force. The Captain pointed out to Mary the different currents on the
ship’s chart, and explained to her their constant direction. Among others there
was one running straight to the Australian continent, and its action is equally
felt in the Atlantic and Pacific. It was doubtless against this that the
BRITANNIA, dismasted and rudderless, had been unable to contend, and
consequently been dashed against the coast, and broken in pieces.
A difficulty about this, however, presented itself. The last intelligence of
Captain Grant was from Callao on the 30th of May, 1862, as appeared in the
Mercantile and Shipping Gazette. “How then was it possible that on the 7th of
June, only eight days after leaving the shores of Peru, that the BRITANNIA
could have found herself in the Indian Ocean?” But to this, Paganel, who was
consulted on the subject, found a very plausible solution.
It was one evening, about six days after their leaving Amsterdam Island,
when they were all chatting together on the poop, that the above-named
difficulty was stated by Glenarvan. Paganel made no reply, but went and
fetched the document. After perusing it, he still remained silent, simply
shrugging his shoulders, as if ashamed of troubling himself about such a trifle.
“Come, my good friend,” said Glenarvan, “at least give us an answer.”
“No,” replied Paganel, “I’ll merely ask a question for Captain John to
answer.”
“And what is it, Monsieur Paganel?” said John Mangles.
“Could a quick ship make the distance in a month over that part of the
Pacific Ocean which lies between America and Australia?”
“Yes, by making two hundred miles in twenty-four hours.”
“Would that be an extraordinary rate of speed?”
“Not at all; sailing clippers often go faster.”
“Well, then, instead of ‘7 June’ on this document, suppose that one figure
has been destroyed by the sea-water, and read ‘17 June’ or ‘27 June,’ and all is
explained.”
“That’s to say,” replied Lady Helena, “that between the 31st of May and
the 27th of June—”
“Captain Grant could have crossed the Pacific and found himself in the
Indian Ocean.”
Paganel’s theory met with universal acceptance.
“That’s one more point cleared up,” said Glenarvan. “Thanks to our friend,
all that remains to be done now is to get to Australia, and look out for traces of
the wreck on the western coast.”
“Or the eastern?” said John Mangles.
“Indeed, John, you may be right, for there is nothing in the document to
indicate which shore was the scene of the catastrophe, and both points of the
continent crossed by the 37th parallel, must, therefore, be explored.”
“Then, my Lord, it is doubtful, after all,” said Mary.
“Oh no, Miss Mary,” John Mangles hastened to reply, seeing the young
girl’s apprehension. “His Lordship will please to consider that if Captain Grant
had gained the shore on the east of Australia, he would almost immediately
have found refuge and assistance. The whole of that coast is English, we might
say, peopled with colonists. The crew of the BRITANNIA could not have gone
ten miles without meeting a fellow-countryman.”
“I am quite of your opinion, Captain John,” said Paganel. “On the eastern
coast Harry Grant would not only have found an English colony easily, but he
would certainly have met with some means of transport back to Europe.”
“And he would not have found the same resources on the side we are
making for?” asked Lady Helena.
“No, madam,” replied Paganel; “it is a desert coast, with no
communication between it and Melbourne or Adelaide. If the BRITANNIA
was wrecked on those rocky shores, she was as much cut off from all chance
of help as if she had been lost on the inhospitable shores of Africa.”
“But what has become of my father there, then, all these two years?” asked
Mary Grant.
“My dear Mary,” replied Paganel, “you have not the least doubt, have you,
that Captain Grant reached the Australian continent after his shipwreck?”
“No, Monsieur Paganel.”
“Well, granting that, what became of him? The suppositions we might
make are not numerous. They are confined to three. Either Harry Grant and his
companions have found their way to the English colonies, or they have fallen
into the hands of the natives, or they are lost in the immense wilds of
Australia.”
“Go on, Paganel,” said Lord Glenarvan, as the learned Frenchman made a
pause.
“The first hypothesis I reject, then, to begin with, for Harry Grant could
not have reached the English colonies, or long ago he would have been back
with his children in the good town of Dundee.”
“Poor father,” murmured Mary, “away from us for two whole years.”
“Hush, Mary,” said Robert, “Monsieur Paganel will tell us.”
“Alas! my boy, I cannot. All that I affirm is, that Captain Grant is in the
hands of the natives.”
“But these natives,” said Lady Helena, hastily, “are they—”
“Reassure yourself, madam,” said Paganel, divining her thoughts. “The
aborigines of Australia are low enough in the scale of human intelligence, and
most degraded and uncivilized, but they are mild and gentle in disposition, and
not sanguinary like their New Zealand neighbors. Though they may be
prisoners, their lives have never been threatened, you may be sure. All
travelers are unanimous in declaring that the Australian natives abhor
shedding blood, and many a time they have found in them faithful allies in
repelling the attacks of evil-disposed convicts far more cruelly inclined.”
“You hear what Monsieur Paganel tells us, Mary,” said Lady Helena
turning to the young girl. “If your father is in the hands of the natives, which
seems probable from the document, we shall find him.”
“And what if he is lost in that immense country?” asked Mary.
“Well, we’ll find him still,” exclaimed Paganel, in a confident tone. “Won’t
we, friends?”
“Most certainly,” replied Glenarvan; and anxious to give a less gloomy
turn to the conversation, he added—
“But I won’t admit the supposition of his being lost, not for an instant.”
“Neither will I,” said Paganel.
“Is Australia a big place?” inquired Robert.
“Australia, my boy, is about as large as four-fifths of Europe. It has
somewhere about 775,000 HECTARES.”
“So much as that?” said the Major.
“Yes, McNabbs, almost to a yard’s breadth. Don’t you think now it has a
right to be called a continent?”
“I do, certainly.”
“I may add,” continued the SAVANT, “that there are but few accounts of
travelers being lost in this immense country. Indeed, I believe Leichardt is the
only one of whose fate we are ignorant, and some time before my departure I
learned from the Geographical Society that Mcintyre had strong hopes of
having discovered traces of him.”
“The whole of Australia, then, is not yet explored?” asked Lady Helena.
“No, madam, but very little of it. This continent is not much better known
than the interior of Africa, and yet it is from no lack of enterprising travelers.
From 1606 to 1862, more than fifty have been engaged in exploring along the
coast and in the interior.”
“Oh, fifty!” exclaimed McNabbs incredulously.
“No, no,” objected the Major; “that is going too far.”
“And I might go farther, McNabbs,” replied the geographer, impatient of
contradiction.
“Yes, McNabbs, quite that number.”
“Farther still, Paganel.”
“If you doubt me, I can give you the names.”
“Oh, oh,” said the Major, coolly. “That’s just like you SAVANTS. You
stick at nothing.”
“Major, will you bet your Purdy-Moore rifle against my telescope?”
“Why not, Paganel, if it would give you any pleasure.”
“Done, Major!” exclaimed Paganel. “You may say good-by to your rifle,
for it will never shoot another chamois or fox unless I lend it to you, which I
shall always be happy to do, by the by.”
“And whenever you require the use of your telescope, Paganel, I shall be
equally obliging,” replied the Major, gravely.
“Let us begin, then; and ladies and gentlemen, you shall be our jury.
Robert, you must keep count.”
This was agreed upon, and Paganel forthwith commenced.
“Mnemosyne! Goddess of Memory, chaste mother of the Muses!” he
exclaimed, “inspire thy faithful servant and fervent worshiper! Two hundred
and fifty-eight years ago, my friends, Australia was unknown. Strong
suspicions were entertained of the existence of a great southern continent. In
the library of your British Museum, Glenarvan, there are two charts, the date
of which is 1550, which mention a country south of Asia, called by the
Portuguese Great Java. But these charts are not sufficiently authentic. In the
seventeenth century, in 1606, Quiros, a Spanish navigator, discovered a
country which he named Australia de Espiritu Santo. Some authors imagine
that this was the New Hebrides group, and not Australia. I am not going to
discuss the question, however. Count Quiros, Robert, and let us pass on to
another.”
“ONE,” said Robert.
“In that same year, Louis Vas de Torres, the second in command of the
fleet of Quiros, pushed further south. But it is to Theodore Hertoge, a
Dutchman, that the honor of the great discovery belongs. He touched the
western coast of Australia in 25 degrees latitude, and called it Eendracht, after
his vessel. From this time navigators increased. In 1618, Zeachen discovered
the northern parts of the coast, and called them Arnheim and Diemen. In 1618,
Jan Edels went along the western coast, and christened it by his own name. In
1622, Leuwin went down as far as the cape which became his namesake.” And
so Paganel continued with name after name until his hearers cried for mercy.
“Stop, Paganel,” said Glenarvan, laughing heartily, “don’t quite crush poor
McNabbs. Be generous; he owns he is vanquished.”
“And what about the rifle?” asked the geographer, triumphantly.
“It is yours, Paganel,” replied the Major, “and I am very sorry for it; but
your memory might gain an armory by such feats.”
“It is certainly impossible to be better acquainted with Australia; not the
least name, not even the most trifling fact—”
“As to the most trifling fact, I don’t know about that,” said the Major,
shaking his head.
“What do you mean, McNabbs?” exclaimed Paganel.
“Simply that perhaps all the incidents connected with the discovery of
Australia may not be known to you.”
“Just fancy,” retorted Paganel, throwing back his head proudly.
“Come now. If I name one fact you don’t know, will you give me back my
rifle?” said McNabbs.
“On the spot, Major.”
“Very well, it’s a bargain, then.”
“Yes, a bargain; that’s settled.”
“All right. Well now, Paganel, do you know how it is that Australia does
not belong to France?”
“But it seems to me—”
“Or, at any rate, do you know what’s the reason the English give?” asked
the Major.
“No,” replied Paganel, with an air of vexation.
“Just because Captain Baudin, who was by no means a timid man, was so
afraid in 1802, of the croaking of the Australian frogs, that he raised his
anchor with all possible speed, and quitted the coast, never to return.”
“What!” exclaimed Paganel. “Do they actually give that version of it in
England? But it is just a bad joke.”
“Bad enough, certainly, but still it is history in the United Kingdom.”
“It’s an insult!” exclaimed the patriotic geographer; “and they relate that
gravely?”
“I must own it is the case,” replied Glenarvan, amidst a general outburst of
laughter. “Do you mean to say you have never heard of it before?”
“Never! But I protest against it. Besides, the English call us ‘frog-eaters.’
Now, in general, people are not afraid of what they eat.”
“It is said, though, for all that,” replied McNabbs. So the Major kept his
famous rifle after all.
CHAPTER V THE STORM ON THE INDIAN OCEAN
Two days after this conversation, John Mangles announced that the
DUNCAN was in longitude 113 degrees 37 minutes, and the passengers found
on consulting the chart that consequently Cape Bernouilli could not be more
than five degrees off. They must be sailing then in that part of the Indian
Ocean which washed the Australian continent, and in four days might hope to
see Cape Bernouilli appear on the horizon.
Hitherto the yacht had been favored by a strong westerly breeze, but now
there were evident signs that a calm was impending, and on the 13th of
December the wind fell entirely; as the sailors say, there was not enough to fill
a cap.
There was no saying how long this state of the atmosphere might last. But
for the powerful propeller the yacht would have been obliged to lie motionless
as a log. The young captain was very much annoyed, however, at the prospect
of emptying his coal-bunkers, for he had covered his ship with canvas,
intending to take advantage of the slightest breeze.
“After all, though,” said Glenarvan, with whom he was talking over the
subject, “it is better to have no wind than a contrary one.”
“Your Lordship is right,” replied John Mangles; “but the fact is these
sudden calms bring change of weather, and this is why I dread them. We are
close on the trade winds, and if we get them ever so little in our teeth, it will
delay us greatly.”
“Well, John, what if it does? It will only make our voyage a little longer.”
“Yes, if it does not bring a storm with it.”
“Do you mean to say you think we are going to have bad weather?” replied
Glenarvan, examining the sky, which from horizon to zenith seemed
absolutely cloudless.
“I do,” returned the captain. “I may say so to your Lordship, but I should
not like to alarm Lady Glenarvan or Miss Grant.”
“You are acting wisely; but what makes you uneasy?”
“Sure indications of a storm. Don’t trust, my Lord, to the appearance of the
sky. Nothing is more deceitful. For the last two days the barometer has been
falling in a most ominous manner, and is now at 27 degrees. This is a warning
I dare not neglect, for there is nothing I dread more than storms in the
Southern Seas; I have had a taste of them already. The vapors which become
condensed in the immense glaciers at the South Pole produce a current of air
of extreme violence. This causes a struggle between the polar and equatorial
winds, which results in cyclones, tornadoes, and all those multiplied varieties
of tempest against which a ship is no match.”
“Well, John,” said Glenarvan, “the DUNCAN is a good ship, and her
captain is a brave sailor. Let the storm come, we’ll meet it!”
John Mangles remained on deck the whole night, for though as yet the sky
was still unclouded, he had such faith in his weather-glass, that he took every
precaution that prudence could suggest. About 11 P. M. the sky began to
darken in the south, and the crew were called up, and all the sails hauled in,
except the foresail, brigantine, top-sail, and jib-boom. At midnight the wind
freshened, and before long the cracking of the masts, and the rattling of the
cordage, and groaning of the timbers, awakened the passengers, who speedily
made their appearance on deck—at least Paganel, Glenarvan, the Major and
Robert.
“Is it the hurricane?” asked Glenarvan quietly.
“Not yet,” replied the captain; “but it is close at hand.”
And he went on giving his orders to the men, and doing his best to make
ready for the storm, standing, like an officer commanding a breach, with his
face to the wind, and his gaze fixed on the troubled sky. The glass had fallen to
26 degrees, and the hand pointed to tempest.
It was one o’clock in the morning when Lady Helena and Miss Grant
ventured upstairs on deck. But they no sooner made their appearance than the
captain hurried toward them, and begged them to go below again immediately.
The waves were already beginning to dash over the side of the ship, and the
sea might any moment sweep right over her from stem to stern. The noise of
the warring elements was so great that his words were scarcely audible, but
Lady Helena took advantage of a sudden lull to ask if there was any danger.
“None whatever,” replied John Mangles; “but you cannot remain on deck,
madam, no more can Miss Mary.”
The ladies could not disobey an order that seemed almost an entreaty, and
they returned to their cabin. At the same moment the wind redoubled its fury,
making the masts bend beneath the weight of the sails, and completely lifting
up the yacht.
“Haul up the foresail!” shouted the captain. “Lower the topsail and jibboom!”
Glenarvan and his companions stood silently gazing at the struggle
between their good ship and the waves, lost in wondering and half-terrified
admiration at the spectacle.
Just then, a dull hissing was heard above the noise of the elements. The
steam was escaping violently, not by the funnel, but from the safety-valves of
the boiler; the alarm whistle sounded unnaturally loud, and the yacht made a
frightful pitch, overturning Wilson, who was at the wheel, by an unexpected
blow from the tiller. The DUNCAN no longer obeyed the helm.
“What is the matter?” cried the captain, rushing on the bridge.
“The ship is heeling over on her side,” replied Wilson.
“The engine! the engine!” shouted the engineer.
Away rushed John to the engine-room. A cloud of steam filled the room.
The pistons were motionless in their cylinders, and they were apparently
powerless, and the engine-driver, fearing for his boilers, was letting off the
steam.
“What’s wrong?” asked the captain.
“The propeller is bent or entangled,” was the reply. “It’s not acting at all.”
“Can’t you extricate it?”
“It is impossible.”
An accident like this could not be remedied, and John’s only resource was
to fall back on his sails, and seek to make an auxiliary of his most powerful
enemy, the wind. He went up again on deck, and after explaining in a few
words to Lord Glenarvan how things stood, begged him to retire to his cabin,
with the rest of the passengers. But Glenarvan wished to remain above.
“No, your Lordship,” said the captain in a firm tone, “I must be alone with
my men. Go into the saloon. The vessel will have a hard fight with the waves,
and they would sweep you over without mercy.”
“But we might be a help.”
“Go in, my Lord, go in. I must indeed insist on it. There are times when I
must be master on board, and retire you must.”
Their situation must indeed be desperate for John Mangles to speak in such
authoritative language. Glenarvan was wise enough to understand this, and felt
he must set an example in obedience. He therefore quitted the deck
immediately with his three companions, and rejoined the ladies, who were
anxiously watching the DENOUEMENT of this war with the elements.
“He’s an energetic fellow, this brave John of mine!” said Lord Glenarvan,
as he entered the saloon.
“That he is,” replied Paganel. “He reminds me of your great Shakespeare’s
boatswain in the ‘Tempest,’ who says to the king on board: ‘Hence! What care
these roarers for the name of king? To cabin! Silence! Trouble us not.’”
However, John Mangles did not lose a second in extricating his ship from
the peril in which she was placed by the condition of her screw propeller. He
resolved to rely on the mainsail for keeping in the right route as far as
possible, and to brace the yards obliquely, so as not to present a direct front to
the storm. The yacht turned about like a swift horse that feels the spur, and
presented a broadside to the billows. The only question was, how long would
she hold out with so little sail, and what sail could resist such violence for any
length of time. The great advantage of keeping up the mainsail was that it
presented to the waves only the most solid portions of the yacht, and kept her
in the right course. Still it involved some peril, for the vessel might get
engulfed between the waves, and not be able to raise herself. But Mangles felt
there was no alternative, and all he could do was to keep the crew ready to
alter the sail at any moment, and stay in the shrouds himself watching the
tempest.
The remainder of the night was spent in this manner, and it was hoped that
morning would bring a calm. But this was a delusive hope. At 8 A. M. the
wind had increased to a hurricane.
John said nothing, but he trembled for his ship, and those on board. The
DUNCAN made a frightful plunge forward, and for an instant the men thought
she would never rise again. Already they had seized their hatchets to cut away
the shrouds from the mainmast, but the next minute the sails were torn away
by the tempest, and had flown off like gigantic albatrosses.
The yacht had risen once more, but she found herself at the mercy of the
waves entirely now, with nothing to steady or direct her, and was so fearfully
pitched and tossed about that every moment the captain expected the masts
would break short off. John had no resource but to put up a forestaysail, and
run before the gale. But this was no easy task. Twenty times over he had all his
work to begin again, and it was 3 P. M. before his attempt succeeded. A mere
shred of canvas though it was, it was enough to drive the DUNCAN forward
with inconceivable rapidity to the northeast, of course in the same direction as
the hurricane. Swiftness was their only chance of safety. Sometimes she would
get in advance of the waves which carried her along, and cutting through them
with her sharp prow, bury herself in their depths. At others, she would keep
pace with them, and make such enormous leaps that there was imminent
danger of her being pitched over on her side, and then again, every now and
then the storm-driven sea would out-distance the yacht, and the angry billows
would sweep over the deck from stem to stern with tremendous violence.
In this alarming situation and amid dreadful alternations of hope and
despair, the 12th of December passed away, and the ensuing night, John
Mangles never left his post, not even to take food. Though his impassive face
betrayed no symptoms of fear, he was tortured with anxiety, and his steady
gaze was fixed on the north, as if trying to pierce through the thick mists that
enshrouded it.
There was, indeed, great cause for fear. The DUNCAN was out of her
course, and rushing toward the Australian coast with a speed which nothing
could lessen. To John Mangles it seemed as if a thunderbolt were driving them
along. Every instant he expected the yacht would dash against some rock, for
he reckoned the coast could not be more than twelve miles off, and better far
be in mid ocean exposed to all its fury than too near land.
John Mangles went to find Glenarvan, and had a private talk with him
about their situation, telling him frankly the true state of affairs, stating the
case with all the coolness of a sailor prepared for anything and everything and
he wound up by saying he might, perhaps, be obliged to cast the yacht on
shore.
“To save the lives of those on board, my Lord,” he added.
“Do it then, John,” replied Lord Glenarvan.
“And Lady Helena, Miss Grant?”
“I will tell them at the last moment when all hope of keeping out at sea is
over. You will let me know?”
“I will, my Lord.”
Glenarvan rejoined his companions, who felt they were in imminent
danger, though no word was spoken on the subject. Both ladies displayed great
courage, fully equal to any of the party. Paganel descanted in the most
inopportune manner about the direction of atmospheric currents, making
interesting comparisons, between tornadoes, cyclones, and rectilinear
tempests. The Major calmly awaited the end with the fatalism of a
Mussulman.
About eleven o’clock, the hurricane appeared to decrease slightly. The
damp mist began to clear away, and a sudden gleam of light revealed a lowlying shore about six miles distant. They were driving right down on it.
Enormous breakers fifty feet high were dashing over it, and the fact of their
height showed John there must be solid ground before they could make such a
rebound.
“Those are sand-banks,” he said to Austin.
“I think they are,” replied the mate.
“We are in God’s hands,” said John. “If we cannot find any opening for the
yacht, and if she doesn’t find the way in herself, we are lost.”
“The tide is high at present, it is just possible we may ride over those sandbanks.”
“But just see those breakers. What ship could stand them. Let us invoke
divine aid, Austin!”
Meanwhile the DUNCAN was speeding on at a frightful rate. Soon she
was within two miles of the sand-banks, which were still veiled from time to
time in thick mist. But John fancied he could see beyond the breakers a quiet
basin, where the DUNCAN would be in comparative safety. But how could
she reach it?
All the passengers were summoned on deck, for now that the hour of
shipwreck was at hand, the captain did not wish anyone to be shut up in his
cabin.
“John!” said Glenarvan in a low voice to the captain, “I will try to save my
wife or perish with her. I put Miss Grant in your charge.”
“Yes, my Lord,” replied John Mangles, raising Glenarvan’s hand to his
moistened eyes.
The yacht was only a few cables’ lengths from the sandbanks. The tide was
high, and no doubt there was abundance of water to float the ship over the
dangerous bar; but these terrific breakers alternately lifting her up and then
leaving her almost dry, would infallibly make her graze the sand-banks.
Was there no means of calming this angry sea? A last expedient struck the
captain. “The oil, my lads!” he exclaimed. “Bring the oil here!”
The crew caught at the idea immediately; this was a plan that had been
successfully tried already. The fury of the waves had been allayed before this
time by covering them with a sheet of oil. Its effect is immediate, but very
temporary. The moment after a ship has passed over the smooth surface, the
sea redoubles its violence, and woe to the bark that follows. The casks of sealoil were forthwith hauled up, for danger seemed to have given the men double
strength. A few hatchet blows soon knocked in the heads, and they were then
hung over the larboard and starboard.
“Be ready!” shouted John, looking out for a favorable moment.
In twenty seconds the yacht reached the bar. Now was the time. “Pour
out!” cried the captain, “and God prosper it!”
The barrels were turned upside down, and instantly a sheet of oil covered
the whole surface of the water. The billows fell as if by magic, the whole
foaming sea seemed leveled, and the DUNCAN flew over its tranquil bosom
into a quiet basin beyond the formidable bar; but almost the same minute the
ocean burst forth again with all its fury, and the towering breakers dashed over
the bar with increased violence.
CHAPTER VI A HOSPITABLE COLONIST
The captain’s first care was to anchor his vessel securely. He found
excellent moorage in five fathoms’ depth of water, with a solid bottom of hard
granite, which afforded a firm hold. There was no danger now of either being
driven away or stranded at low water. After so many hours of danger, the
DUNCAN found herself in a sort of creek, sheltered by a high circular point
from the winds outside in the open sea.
Lord Glenarvan grasped John Mangles’ hand, and simply said: “Thank
you, John.”
This was all, but John felt it ample recompense. Glenarvan kept to himself
the secret of his anxiety, and neither Lady Helena, nor Mary, nor Robert
suspected the grave perils they had just escaped.
One important fact had to be ascertained. On what part of the coast had the
tempest thrown them? How far must they go to regain the parallel. At what
distance S. W. was Cape Bernouilli? This was soon determined by taking the
position of the ship, and it was found that she had scarcely deviated two
degrees from the route. They were in longitude 36 degrees 12 minutes, and
latitude 32 degrees 67 minutes, at Cape Catastrophe, three hundred miles from
Cape Bernouilli. The nearest port was Adelaide, the Capital of Southern
Australia.
Could the DUNCAN be repaired there? This was the question. The extent
of the injuries must first be ascertained, and in order to do this he ordered
some of the men to dive down below the stern. Their report was that one of the
branches of the screw was bent, and had got jammed against the stern post,
which of course prevented all possibility of rotation. This was a serious
damage, so serious as to require more skilful workmen than could be found in
Adelaide.
After mature reflection, Lord Glenarvan and John Mangles came to the
determination to sail round the Australian coast, stopping at Cape Bernouilli,
and continuing their route south as far as Melbourne, where the DUNCAN
could speedily be put right. This effected, they would proceed to cruise along
the eastern coast to complete their search for the BRITANNIA.
This decision was unanimously approved, and it was agreed that they
should start with the first fair wind. They had not to wait long for the same
night the hurricane had ceased entirely, and there was only a manageable
breeze from the S. W. Preparations for sailing were instantly commenced, and
at four o’clock in the morning the crew lifted the anchors, and got under way
with fresh canvas outspread, and a wind blowing right for the Australian
shores.
Two hours afterward Cape Catastrophe was out of sight. In the evening
they doubled Cape Borda, and came alongside Kangaroo Island. This is the
largest of the Australian islands, and a great hiding place for runaway
convicts. Its appearance was enchanting. The stratified rocks on the shore
were richly carpeted with verdure, and innumerable kangaroos were jumping
over the woods and plains, just as at the time of its discovery in 1802. Next
day, boats were sent ashore to examine the coast minutely, as they were now
on the 36th parallel, and between that and the 38th Glenarvan wished to leave
no part unexplored.
The boats had hard, rough work of it now, but the men never complained.
Glenarvan and his inseparable companion, Paganel, and young Robert
generally accompanied them. But all this painstaking exploration came to
nothing. Not a trace of the shipwreck could be seen anywhere. The Australian
shores revealed no more than the Patagonian. However, it was not time yet to
lose hope altogether, for they had not reached the exact point indicated by the
document.
On the 20th of December, they arrived off Cape Bernouilli, which
terminates Lacepede Bay, and yet not a vestige of the BRITANNIA had been
discovered. Still this was not surprising, as it was two years since the
occurrence of the catastrophe, and the sea might, and indeed must, have
scattered and destroyed whatever fragments of the brig had remained. Besides,
the natives who scent a wreck as the vultures do a dead body, would have
pounced upon it and carried off the smaller DEBRIS. There was no doubt
whatever Harry Grant and his companions had been made prisoners the
moment the waves threw them on the shore, and been dragged away into the
interior of the continent.
But if so, what becomes of Paganel’s ingenious hypothesis about the
document? viz., that it had been thrown into a river and carried by a current
into the sea. That was a plausible enough theory in Patagonia, but not in the
part of Australia intersected by the 37th parallel. Besides the Patagonian
rivers, the Rio Colorado and the Rio Negro, flow into the sea along deserted
solitudes, uninhabited and uninhabitable; while, on the contrary, the principal
rivers of Australia—the Murray, the Yarrow, the Torrens, the Darling—all
connected with each other, throw themselves into the ocean by wellfrequented routes, and their mouths are ports of great activity. What
likelihood, consequently, would there be that a fragile bottle would ever find
its way along such busy thoroughfares right out into the Indian Ocean?
Paganel himself saw the impossibility of it, and confessed to the Major,
who raised a discussion on the subject, that his hypothesis would be altogether
illogical in Australia. It was evident that the degrees given related to the place
where the BRITANNIA was actually shipwrecked and not the place of
captivity, and that the bottle therefore had been thrown into the sea on the
western coast of the continent.
However, as Glenarvan justly remarked, this did not alter the fact of
Captain Grant’s captivity in the least degree, though there was no reason now
for prosecuting the search for him along the 37th parallel, more than any other.
It followed, consequently, that if no traces of the BRITANNIA were
discovered at Cape Bernouilli, the only thing to be done was to return to
Europe. Lord Glenarvan would have been unsuccessful, but he would have
done his duty courageously and conscientiously.
But the young Grants did not feel disheartened. They had long since said to
themselves that the question of their father’s deliverance was about to be
finally settled. Irrevocably, indeed, they might consider it, for as Paganel had
judiciously demonstrated, if the wreck had occurred on the eastern side, the
survivors would have found their way back to their own country long since.
“Hope on! Hope on, Mary!” said Lady Helena to the young girl, as they
neared the shore; “God’s hand will still lead us.”
“Yes, Miss Mary,” said Captain John. “Man’s extremity is God’s
opportunity. When one way is hedged up another is sure to open.”
“God grant it,” replied Mary.
Land was quite close now. The cape ran out two miles into the sea, and
terminated in a gentle slope, and the boat glided easily into a sort of natural
creek between coral banks in a state of formation, which in course of time
would be a belt of coral reefs round the southern point of the Australian coast.
Even now they were quite sufficiently formidable to destroy the keel of a ship,
and the BRITANNIA might likely enough have been dashed to pieces on
them.
The passengers landed without the least difficulty on an absolutely desert
shore. Cliffs composed of beds of strata made a coast line sixty to eighty feet
high, which it would have been difficult to scale without ladders or crampirons. John Mangles happened to discover a natural breach about half a mile
south. Part of the cliff had been partially beaten down, no doubt, by the sea in
some equinoctial gale. Through this opening the whole party passed and
reached the top of the cliff by a pretty steep path. Robert climbed like a young
cat, and was the first on the summit, to the despair of Paganel, who was quite
ashamed to see his long legs, forty years old, out-distanced by a young urchin
of twelve. However, he was far ahead of the Major, who gave himself no
concern on the subject.
They were all soon assembled on the lofty crags, and from this elevation
could command a view of the whole plain below. It appeared entirely
uncultivated, and covered with shrubs and bushes. Glenarvan thought it
resembled some glens in the lowlands of Scotland, and Paganel fancied it like
some barren parts of Britanny. But along the coast the country appeared to be
inhabited, and significant signs of industry revealed the presence of civilized
men, not savages.
“A mill!” exclaimed Robert.
And, sure enough, in the distance the long sails of a mill appeared,
apparently about three miles off.
“It certainly is a windmill,” said Paganel, after examining the object in
question through his telescope.
“Let us go to it, then,” said Glenarvan.
Away they started, and, after walking about half an hour, the country began
to assume a new aspect, suddenly changing its sterility for cultivation. Instead
of bushes, quick-set hedges met the eye, inclosing recent clearings. Several
bullocks and about half a dozen horses were feeding in meadows, surrounded
by acacias supplied from the vast plantations of Kangaroo Island. Gradually
fields covered with cereals came in sight, whole acres covered with bristling
ears of corn, hay-ricks in the shape of large bee-hives, blooming orchards, a
fine garden worthy of Horace, in which the useful and agreeable were
blended; then came sheds; commons wisely distributed, and last of all, a plain
comfortable dwelling-house, crowned by a joyous-sounding mill, and fanned
and shaded by its long sails as they kept constantly moving round.
Just at that moment a pleasant-faced man, about fifty years of age, came
out of the house, warned, by the loud barking of four dogs, of the arrival of
strangers. He was followed by five handsome strapping lads, his sons, and
their mother, a fine tall woman. There was no mistaking the little group. This
was a perfect type of the Irish colonist—a man who, weary of the miseries of
his country, had come, with his family, to seek fortune and happiness beyond
the seas.
Before Glenarvan and his party had time to reach the house and present
themselves in due form, they heard the cordial words: “Strangers! welcome to
the house of Paddy O’Moore!”
“You are Irish,” said Glenarvan, “if I am not mistaken,” warmly grasping
the outstretched hand of the colonist.
“I was,” replied Paddy O’Moore, “but now I am Australian. Come in,
gentlemen, whoever you may be, this house is yours.”
It was impossible not to accept an invitation given with such grace. Lady
Helena and Mary Grant were led in by Mrs. O’Moore, while the gentlemen
were assisted by his sturdy sons to disencumber themselves of their fire-arms.
An immense hall, light and airy, occupied the ground floor of the house,
which was built of strong planks laid horizontally. A few wooden benches
fastened against the gaily-colored walls, about ten stools, two oak chests on tin
mugs, a large long table where twenty guests could sit comfortably, composed
the furniture, which looked in perfect keeping with the solid house and robust
inmates.
The noonday meal was spread; the soup tureen was smoking between roast
beef and a leg of mutton, surrounded by large plates of olives, grapes, and
oranges. The necessary was there and there was no lack of the superfluous.
The host and hostess were so pleasant, and the big table, with its abundant
fare, looked so inviting, that it would have been ungracious not to have seated
themselves. The farm servants, on equal footing with their master, were
already in their places to take their share of the meal. Paddy O’Moore pointed
to the seats reserved for the strangers, and said to Glenarvan:
“I was waiting for you.”
“Waiting for us!” replied Glenarvan in a tone of surprise.
“I am always waiting for those who come,” said the Irishman; and then, in
a solemn voice, while the family and domestics reverently stood, he repeated
the BENEDICITE.
Dinner followed immediately, during which an animated conversation was
kept up on all sides. From Scotch to Irish is but a handsbreadth. The Tweed,
several fathoms wide, digs a deeper trench between Scotland and England than
the twenty leagues of Irish Channel, which separates Old Caledonia from the
Emerald Isle. Paddy O’Moore related his history. It was that of all emigrants
driven by misfortune from their own country. Many come to seek fortunes
who only find trouble and sorrow, and then they throw the blame on chance,
and forget the true cause is their own idleness and vice and want of
commonsense. Whoever is sober and industrious, honest and economical, gets
on.
Such a one had been and was Paddy O’Moore. He left Dundalk, where he
was starving, and came with his family to Australia, landed at Adelaide,
where, refusing employment as a miner, he got engaged on a farm, and two
months afterward commenced clearing ground on his own account.
The whole territory of South Australia is divided into lots, each containing
eighty acres, and these are granted to colonists by the government. Any
industrious man, by proper cultivation, can not only get a living out of his lot,
but lay by pounds 80 a year.
Paddy O’Moore knew this. He profited by his own former experience, and
laid by every penny he could till he had saved enough to purchase new lots.
His family prospered, and his farm also. The Irish peasant became a landed
proprietor, and though his little estate had only been under cultivation for two
years, he had five hundred acres cleared by his own hands, and five hundred
head of cattle. He was his own master, after having been a serf in Europe, and
as independent as one can be in the freest country in the world.
His guests congratulated him heartily as he ended his narration; and Paddy
O’Moore no doubt expected confidence for confidence, but he waited in vain.
However, he was one of those discreet people who can say, “I tell you who I
am, but I don’t ask who you are.” Glenarvan’s great object was to get
information about the BRITANNIA, and like a man who goes right to the
point, he began at once to interrogate O’Moore as to whether he had heard of
the shipwreck.
The reply of the Irishman was not favorable; he had never heard the vessel
mentioned. For two years, at least, no ship had been wrecked on that coast,
neither above nor below the Cape. Now, the date of the catastrophe was within
two years. He could, therefore, declare positively that the survivors of the
wreck had not been thrown on that part of the western shore. “Now, my Lord,”
he added, “may I ask what interest you have in making the inquiry?”
This pointed question elicited in reply the whole history of the expedition.
Glenarvan related the discovery of the document, and the various attempts that
had been made to follow up the precise indications given of the whereabouts
of the unfortunate captives; and he concluded his account by expressing his
doubt whether they should ever find the Captain after all.
His dispirited tone made a painful impression on the minds of his auditors.
Robert and Mary could not keep back their tears, and Paganel had not a word
of hope or comfort to give them. John Mangles was grieved to the heart,
though he, too, was beginning to yield to the feeling of hopelessness which
had crept over the rest, when suddenly the whole party were electrified by
hearing a voice exclaim: “My Lord, praise and thank God! if Captain Grant is
alive, he is on this Australian continent.”
CHAPTER VII THE QUARTERMASTER OF THE “BRITANNIA”
The surprise caused by these words cannot be described. Glenarvan sprang
to his feet, and pushing back his seat, exclaimed: “Who spoke?”
“I did,” said one of the servants, at the far end of the table.
“You, Ayrton!” replied his master, not less bewildered than Glenarvan.
“Yes, it was I,” rejoined Ayrton in a firm tone, though somewhat agitated
voice. “A Scotchman like yourself, my Lord, and one of the shipwrecked crew
of the BRITANNIA.”
The effect of such a declaration may be imagined. Mary Grant fell back,
half-fainting, in Lady Helena’s arms, overcome by joyful emotion, and Robert,
and Mangles, and Paganel started up and toward the man that Paddy O’Moore
had addressed as AYRTON. He was a coarse-looking fellow, about forty-five
years of age, with very bright eyes, though half-hidden beneath thick,
overhanging brows. In spite of extreme leanness there was an air of unusual
strength about him. He seemed all bone and nerves, or, to use a Scotch
expression, as if he had not wasted time in making fat. He was broadshouldered and of middle height, and though his features were coarse, his face
was so full of intelligence and energy and decision, that he gave one a
favorable impression. The interest he excited was still further heightened by
the marks of recent suffering imprinted on his countenance. It was evident that
he had endured long and severe hardships, and that he had borne them bravely
and come off victor.
“You are one of the shipwrecked sailors of the BRITANNIA?” was
Glenarvan’s first question.
“Yes, my Lord; Captain Grant’s quartermaster.”
“And saved with him after the shipwreck?”
“No, my Lord, no. I was separated from him at that terrible moment, for I
was swept off the deck as the ship struck.”
“Then you are not one of the two sailors mentioned in the document?”
“No; I was not aware of the existence of the document. The captain must
have thrown it into the sea when I was no longer on board.”
“But the captain? What about the captain?”
“I believed he had perished; gone down with all his crew. I imagined
myself the sole survivor.”
“But you said just now, Captain Grant was living.”
“No, I said, ‘if the captain is living.’”
“And you added, ‘he is on the Australian continent.’”
“And, indeed, he cannot be anywhere else.”
“Then you don’t know where he is?”
“No, my Lord. I say again, I supposed he was buried beneath the waves, or
dashed to pieces against the rocks. It was from you I learned that he was still
alive.”
“What then do you know?”
“Simply this—if Captain Grant is alive, he is in Australia.”
“Where did the shipwreck occur?” asked Major McNabbs.
This should have been the first question, but in the excitement caused by
the unexpected incident, Glenarvan cared more to know where the captain
was, than where the BRITANNIA had been lost. After the Major’s inquiry,
however, Glenarvan’s examination proceeded more logically, and before long
all the details of the event stood out clearly before the minds of the company.
To the question put by the Major, Ayrton replied:
“When I was swept off the forecastle, when I was hauling in the jib-boom,
the BRITANNIA was running right on the Australian coast. She was not more
than two cables’ length from it and consequently she must have struck just
there.”
“In latitude 37 degrees?” asked John Mangles.
“Yes, in latitude 37 degrees.”
“On the west coast?”
“No, on the east coast,” was the prompt reply.
“And at what date?”
“It was on the night of the 27th of June, 1862.”
“Exactly, just exactly,” exclaimed Glenarvan.
“You see, then, my Lord,” continued Ayrton, “I might justly say, If Captain
Grant is alive, he is on the Australian continent, and it is useless looking for
him anywhere else.”
“And we will look for him there, and find him too, and save him,”
exclaimed Paganel. “Ah, precious document,” he added, with perfect
NAIVETE, “you must own you have fallen into the hands of uncommonly
shrewd people.”
But, doubtless, nobody heard his flattering words, for Glenarvan and Lady
Helena, and Mary Grant, and Robert, were too much engrossed with Ayrton to
listen to anyone else. They pressed round him and grasped his hands. It
seemed as if this man’s presence was the sure pledge of Harry Grant’s
deliverance. If this sailor had escaped the perils of the shipwreck, why should
not the captain? Ayrton was quite sanguine as to his existence; but on what
part of the continent he was to be found, that he could not say. The replies the
man gave to the thousand questions that assailed him on all sides were
remarkably intelligent and exact. All the while he spake, Mary held one of his
hands in hers. This sailor was a companion of her father’s, one of the crew of
the BRITANNIA. He had lived with Harry Grant, crossed the seas with him
and shared his dangers. Mary could not keep her eyes off his face, rough and
homely though it was, and she wept for joy.
Up to this time no one had ever thought of doubting either the veracity or
identity of the quartermaster; but the Major, and perhaps John Mangles, now
began to ask themselves if this Ayrton’s word was to be absolutely believed.
There was something suspicious about this unexpected meeting. Certainly the
man had mentioned facts and dates which corresponded, and the minuteness of
his details was most striking. Still exactness of details was no positive proof.
Indeed, it has been noticed that a falsehood has sometimes gained ground by
being exceedingly particular in minutiae. McNabbs, therefore, prudently
refrained from committing himself by expressing any opinion.
John Mangles, however, was soon convinced when he heard Ayrton speak
to the young girl about her father. He knew Mary and Robert quite well. He
had seen them in Glasgow when the ship sailed. He remembered them at the
farewell breakfast given on board the BRITANNIA to the captain’s friends, at
which Sheriff Mcintyre was present. Robert, then a boy of ten years old, had
been given into his charge, and he ran away and tried to climb the rigging.
“Yes, that I did, it is quite right,” said Robert.
He went on to mention several other trifling incidents, without attaching
the importance to them that John Mangles did, and when he stopped Mary
Grant said, in her soft voice: “Oh, go on, Mr. Ayrton, tell us more about our
father.”
The quartermaster did his best to satisfy the poor girl, and Glenarvan did
not interrupt him, though a score of questions far more important crowded into
his mind. Lady Helena made him look at Mary’s beaming face, and the words
he was about to utter remained unspoken.
Ayrton gave an account of the BRITANNIA’S voyage across the Pacific.
Mary knew most of it before, as news of the ship had come regularly up to the
month of May, 1862. In the course of the year Harry Grant had touched at all
the principal ports. He had been to the Hebrides, to New Guinea, New
Zealand, and New Caledonia, and had succeeded in finding an important point
on the western coast of Papua, where the establishment of a Scotch colony
seemed to him easy, and its prosperity certain. A good port on the Molucca
and Philippine route must attract ships, especially when the opening of the
Suez Canal would have supplanted the Cape route. Harry Grant was one of
those who appreciated the great work of M. De Lesseps, and would not allow
political rivalries to interfere with international interests.
After reconnoitering Papua, the BRITANNIA went to provision herself at
Callao, and left that port on the 30th of May, 1862, to return to Europe by the
Indian Ocean and the Cape. Three weeks afterward, his vessel was disabled by
a fearful storm in which they were caught, and obliged to cut away the masts.
A leak sprang in the hold, and could not be stopped. The crew were too
exhausted to work the pumps, and for eight days the BRITANNIA was tossed
about in the hurricane like a shuttlecock. She had six feet of water in her hold,
and was gradually sinking. The boats had been all carried away by the
tempest; death stared them in the face, when, on the night of the 22d of June,
as Paganel had rightly supposed, they came in sight of the eastern coast of
Australia.
The ship soon neared the shore, and presently dashed violently against it.
Ayrton was swept off by a wave, and thrown among the breakers, where he
lost consciousness. When he recovered, he found himself in the hands of
natives, who dragged him away into the interior of the country. Since that time
he had never heard the BRITANNIA’s name mentioned, and reasonably
enough came to the conclusion that she had gone down with all hands off the
dangerous reefs of Twofold Bay.
This ended Ayrton’s recital, and more than once sorrowful exclamations
were evoked by the story. The Major could not, in common justice, doubt its
authenticity. The sailor was then asked to narrate his own personal history,
which was short and simple enough. He had been carried by a tribe of natives
four hundred miles north of the 37th parallel. He spent a miserable existence
there—not that he was ill-treated, but the natives themselves lived miserably.
He passed two long years of painful slavery among them, but always
cherished in his heart the hope of one day regaining his freedom, and watching
for the slightest opportunity that might turn up, though he knew that his flight
would be attended with innumerable dangers.
At length one night in October, 1864, he managed to escape the vigilance
of the natives, and took refuge in the depths of immense forests. For a whole
month he subsisted on roots, edible ferns and mimosa gums, wandering
through vast solitudes, guiding himself by the sun during the day and by the
stars at night. He went on, though often almost despairingly, through bogs and
rivers, and across mountains, till he had traversed the whole of the uninhabited
part of the continent, where only a few bold travelers have ventured; and at
last, in an exhausted and all but dying condition, he reached the hospitable
dwelling of Paddy O’Moore, where he said he had found a happy home in
exchange for his labor.
“And if Ayrton speaks well of me,” said the Irish settler, when the narrative
ended, “I have nothing but good to say of him. He is an honest, intelligent
fellow and a good worker; and as long as he pleases, Paddy O’Moore’s house
shall be his.”
Ayrton thanked him by a gesture, and waited silently for any fresh question
that might be put to him, though he thought to himself that he surely must
have satisfied all legitimate curiosity. What could remain to be said that he had
not said a hundred times already. Glenarvan was just about to open a
discussion about their future plan of action, profiting by this rencontre with
Ayrton, and by the information he had given them, when Major McNabbs,
addressing the sailor said, “You were quartermaster, you say, on the
BRITANNIA?”
“Yes,” replied Ayrton, without the least hesitation.
But as if conscious that a certain feeling of mistrust, however slight, had
prompted the inquiry, he added, “I have my shipping papers with me; I saved
them from the wreck.”
He left the room immediately to fetch his official document, and, though
hardly absent a minute, Paddy O’Moore managed to say, “My Lord, you may
trust Ayrton; I vouch for his being an honest man. He has been two months
now in my service, and I have never had once to find fault with him. I knew
all this story of his shipwreck and his captivity. He is a true man, worthy of
your entire confidence.”
Glenarvan was on the point of replying that he had never doubted his good
faith, when the man came in and brought his engagement written out in due
form. It was a paper signed by the shipowners and Captain Grant. Mary
recognized her father’s writing at once. It was to certify that “Tom Ayrton,
able-bodied seaman, was engaged as quartermaster on board the three-mast
vessel, the BRITANNIA, Glasgow.”
There could not possibly be the least doubt now of Ayrton’s identity, for it
would have been difficult to account for his possession of the document if he
were not the man named in it.
“Now then,” said Glenarvan, “I wish to ask everyone’s opinion as to what
is best to be done. Your advice, Ayrton, will be particularly valuable, and I
shall be much obliged if you would let us have it.”
After a few minutes’ thought, Ayrton replied—“I thank you, my Lord, for
the confidence you show towards me, and I hope to prove worthy of it. I have
some knowledge of the country, and the habits of the natives, and if I can be of
any service to you—”
“Most certainly you can,” interrupted Glenarvan.
“I think with you,” resumed Ayrton, “that the captain and his two sailors
have escaped alive from the wreck, but since they have not found their way to
the English settlement, nor been seen any where, I have no doubt that their fate
has been similar to my own, and that they are prisoners in the hands of some
of the native tribes.”
“That’s exactly what I have always argued,” said Paganel. “The
shipwrecked men were taken prisoners, as they feared. But must we conclude
without question that, like yourself, they have been dragged away north of the
37th parallel?”
“I should suppose so, sir; for hostile tribes would hardly remain anywhere
near the districts under the British rule.”
“That will complicate our search,” said Glenarvan, somewhat disconcerted.
“How can we possibly find traces of the captives in the heart of so vast a
continent?”
No one replied, though Lady Helena’s questioning glances at her
companions seemed to press for an answer. Paganel even was silent. His
ingenuity for once was at fault. John Mangles paced the cabin with great
strides, as if he fancied himself on the deck of his ship, evidently quite
nonplussed.
“And you, Mr. Ayrton,” said Lady Helena at last, “what would you do?”
“Madam,” replied Ayrton, readily enough, “I should re-embark in the
DUNCAN, and go right to the scene of the catastrophe. There I should be
guided by circumstances, and by any chance indications we might discover.”
“Very good,” returned Glenarvan; “but we must wait till the DUNCAN is
repaired.”
“Ah, she has been injured then?” said Ayrton.
“Yes,” replied Mangles.
“To any serious extent?”
“No; but such injuries as require more skilful workmanship than we have
on board. One of the branches of the screw is twisted, and we cannot get it
repaired nearer than Melbourne.”
“Well, let the ship go to Melbourne then,” said Paganel, “and we will go
without her to Twofold Bay.”
“And how?” asked Mangles.
“By crossing Australia as we crossed America, keeping along the 37th
parallel.”
“But the DUNCAN?” repeated Ayrton, as if particularly anxious on that
score.
“The DUNCAN can rejoin us, or we can rejoin her, as the case may be.
Should we discover Captain Grant in the course of our journey, we can all
return together to Melbourne. If we have to go on to the coast, on the contrary,
then the DUNCAN can come to us there. Who has any objection to make?
Have you, Major?”
“No, not if there is a practicable route across Australia.”
“So practicable, that I propose Lady Helena and Miss Grant should
accompany us.”
“Are you speaking seriously?” asked Glenarvan.
“Perfectly so, my Lord. It is a journey of 350 miles, not more. If we go
twelve miles a day it will barely take us a month, just long enough to put the
vessel in trim. If we had to cross the continent in a lower latitude, at its wildest
part, and traverse immense deserts, where there is no water and where the heat
is tropical, and go where the most adventurous travelers have never yet
ventured, that would be a different matter. But the 37th parallel cuts only
through the province of Victoria, quite an English country, with roads and
railways, and well populated almost everywhere. It is a journey you might
make, almost, in a chaise, though a wagon would be better. It is a mere trip
from London to Edinburgh, nothing more.”
“What about wild beasts, though?” asked Glenarvan, anxious to go into all
the difficulties of the proposal.
“There are no wild beasts in Australia.”
“And how about the savages?”
“There are no savages in this latitude, and if there were, they are not cruel,
like the New Zealanders.”
“And the convicts?”
“There are no convicts in the southern provinces, only in the eastern
colonies. The province of Victoria not only refused to admit them, but passed
a law to prevent any ticket-of-leave men from other provinces from entering
her territories. This very year the Government threatened to withdraw its
subsidy from the Peninsular Company if their vessels continued to take in coal
in those western parts of Australia where convicts are admitted. What! Don’t
you know that, and you an Englishman?”
“In the first place, I beg leave to say I am not an Englishman,” replied
Glenarvan.
“What M. Paganel says is perfectly correct,” said Paddy O’Moore. “Not
only the province of Victoria, but also Southern Australia, Queensland, and
even Tasmania, have agreed to expel convicts from their territories. Ever since
I have been on this farm, I have never heard of one in this Province.”
“And I can speak for myself. I have never come across one.”
“You see then, friends,” went on Jacques Paganel, “there are few if any
savages, no ferocious animals, no convicts, and there are not many countries
of Europe for which you can say as much. Well, will you go?”
“What do you think, Helena?” asked Glenarvan.
“What we all think, dear Edward,” replied Lady Helena, turning toward
her companions; “let us be off at once.”
CHAPTER VIII PREPARATION FOR THE JOURNEY
GLENARVAN never lost much time between adopting an idea and
carrying it out. As soon as he consented to Paganel’s proposition, he gave
immediate orders to make arrangements for the journey with as little delay as
possible. The time of starting was fixed for the 22d of December, the next day
but one.
What results might not come out of this journey. The presence of Harry
Grant had become an indisputable fact, and the chances of finding him had
increased. Not that anyone expected to discover the captain exactly on the
37th parallel, which they intended strictly to follow, but they might come upon
his track, and at all events, they were going to the actual spot where the wreck
had occurred. That was the principal point.
Besides, if Ayrton consented to join them and act as their guide through the
forests of the province of Victoria and right to the eastern coast, they would
have a fresh chance of success. Glenarvan was sensible of this, and asked his
host whether he would have any great objection to his asking Ayrton to
accompany them, for he felt particularly desirous of securing the assistance of
Harry Grant’s old companion.
Paddy O’Moore consented, though he would regret the loss of his excellent
servant.
“Well, then, Ayrton, will you come with us in our search expedition?”
Ayrton did not reply immediately. He even showed signs of hesitation; but
at last, after due reflection, said, “Yes, my Lord, I will go with you, and if I
can not take you to Captain Grant, I can at least take you to the very place
where his ship struck.”
“Thanks, Ayrton.”
“One question, my Lord.”
“Well?”
“Where will you meet the DUNCAN again?”
“At Melbourne, unless we traverse the whole continent from coast to
coast.”
“But the captain?”
“The captain will await my instructions in the port of Melbourne.”
“You may depend on me then, my Lord.”
“I will, Ayrton.”
The quartermaster was warmly thanked by the passengers of the
DUNCAN, and the children loaded him with caresses. Everyone rejoiced in
his decision except the Irishman, who lost in him an intelligent and faithful
helper. But Paddy understood the importance Glenarvan attached to the
presence of the man, and submitted. The whole party then returned to the ship,
after arranging a rendezvous with Ayrton, and ordering him to procure the
necessary means of conveyance across the country.
When John Mangles supported the proposition of Paganel, he took for
granted that he should accompany the expedition. He began to speak to
Glenarvan at once about it, and adduced all sorts of arguments to advance his
cause—his devotion to Lady Helena and his Lordship, how useful could he be
in organizing the party, and how useless on board the DUNCAN; everything,
in fact, but the main reason, and that he had no need to bring forward.
“I’ll only ask you one question, John,” said Glenarvan. “Have you entire
confidence in your chief officer?”
“Absolute,” replied Mangles, “Tom Austin is a good sailor. He will take
the ship to her destination, see that the repairs are skilfully executed, and bring
her back on the appointed day. Tom is a slave to duty and discipline. Never
would he take it upon himself to alter or retard the execution of an order. Your
Lordship may rely on him as on myself.”
“Very well then, John,” replied Glenarvan. “You shall go with us, for it
would be advisable,” he added, smiling, “that you should be there when we
find Mary Grant’s father.”
“Oh! your Lordship,” murmured John, turning pale. He could say no more,
but grasped Lord Glenarvan’s hand.
Next day, John Mangles and the ship’s carpenter, accompanied by sailors
carrying provisions, went back to Paddy O’Moore’s house to consult the
Irishman about the best method of transport. All the family met him, ready to
give their best help. Ayrton was there, and gave the benefit of his experience.
On one point both he and Paddy agreed, that the journey should be made in
a bullock-wagon by the ladies, and that the gentlemen should ride on
horseback. Paddy could furnish both bullocks and vehicle. The vehicle was a
cart twenty feet long, covered over by a tilt, and resting on four large wheels
without spokes or felloes, or iron tires—in a word, plain wooden discs. The
front and hinder part were connected by means of a rude mechanical
contrivance, which did not allow of the vehicle turning quickly. There was a
pole in front thirty-five feet long, to which the bullocks were to be yoked in
couples. These animals were able to draw both with head and neck, as their
yoke was fastened on the nape of the neck, and to this a collar was attached by
an iron peg. It required great skill to drive such a long, narrow, shaky concern,
and to guide such a team by a goad; but Ayrton had served his apprenticeship
to it on the Irishman’s farm, and Paddy could answer for his competency. The
role of conductor was therefore assigned to him.
There were no springs to the wagon, and, consequently, it was not likely to
be very comfortable; but, such as it was, they had to take it. But if the rough
construction could not be altered, John Mangles resolved that the interior
should be made as easy as possible. His first care was to divide it into two
compartments by a wooden partition. The back one was intended for the
provisions and luggage, and M. Olbinett’s portable kitchen. The front was set
apart especially for the ladies, and, under the carpenter’s hands, was to be
speedily converted into a comfortable room, covered with a thick carpet, and
fitted up with a toilet table and two couches. Thick leather curtains shut in this
apartment, and protected the occupants from the chilliness of the nights. In
case of necessity, the gentlemen might shelter themselves here, when the
violent rains came on, but a tent was to be their usual resting-place when the
caravan camped for the night. John Mangles exercised all his ingenuity in
furnishing the small space with everything that the two ladies could possibly
require, and he succeeded so well, that neither Lady Helena nor Mary had
much reason to regret leaving their cosy cabins on board the DUNCAN.
For the rest of the party, the preparations were soon made, for they needed
much less. Strong horses were provided for Lord Glenarvan, Paganel, Robert
Grant, McNabbs, and John Mangles; also for the two sailors, Wilson and
Mulrady, who were to accompany their captain. Ayrton’s place was, of course,
to be in front of the wagon, and M. Olbinett, who did not much care for
equitation, was to make room for himself among the baggage. Horses and
bullocks were grazing in the Irishman’s meadows, ready to fetch at a
moment’s notice.
After all arrangements were made, and the carpenter set to work, John
Mangles escorted the Irishman and his family back to the vessel, for Paddy
wished to return the visit of Lord Glenarvan. Ayrton thought proper to go too,
and about four o’clock the party came over the side of the DUNCAN.
They were received with open arms. Glenarvan would not be outstripped
in politeness, and invited his visitors to stop and dine. His hospitality was
willingly accepted. Paddy was quite amazed at the splendor of the saloon, and
was loud in admiration of the fitting up of the cabins, and the carpets and
hangings, as well as of the polished maple-wood of the upper deck. Ayrton’s
approbation was much less hearty, for he considered it mere costly superfluity.
But when he examined the yacht with a sailor’s eye, the quartermaster of
the BRITANNIA was as enthusiastic about it as Paddy. He went down into the
hold, inspected the screw department and the engine-room, examining the
engine thoroughly, and inquired about its power and consumption. He
explored the coal-bunkers, the store-room, the powder-store, and armory, in
which last he seemed to be particularly attracted by a cannon mounted on the
forecastle. Glenarvan saw he had to do with a man who understood such
matters, as was evident from his questions. Ayrton concluded his
investigations by a survey of the masts and rigging.
“You have a fine vessel, my Lord,” he said after his curiosity was satisfied.
“A good one, and that is best,” replied Glenarvan.
“And what is her tonnage?”
“Two hundred and ten tons.”
“I don’t think I am far out,” continued Ayrton, “in judging her speed at
fifteen knots. I should say she could do that easily.”
“Say seventeen,” put in John Mangles, “and you’ve hit the mark.”
“Seventeen!” exclaimed the quartermaster. “Why, not a man-of-war—not
the best among them, I mean—could chase her!”
“Not one,” replied Mangles. “The DUNCAN is a regular racing yacht, and
would never let herself be beaten.”
“Even at sailing?” asked Ayrton.
“Even at sailing.”
“Well, my Lord, and you too, captain,” returned Ayrton, “allow a sailor
who knows what a ship is worth, to compliment you on yours.”
“Stay on board of her, then, Ayrton,” said Glenarvan; “it rests with yourself
to call it yours.”
“I will think of it, my Lord,” was all Ayrton’s reply.
Just then M. Olbinett came to announce dinner, and his Lordship repaired
with his guests to the saloon.
“That Ayrton is an intelligent man,” said Paganel to the Major.
“Too intelligent!” muttered McNabbs, who, without any apparent reason,
had taken a great dislike to the face and manners of the quartermaster.
During the dinner, Ayrton gave some interesting details about the
Australian continent, which he knew perfectly. He asked how many sailors
were going to accompany the expedition, and seemed astonished to hear that
only two were going. He advised Glenarvan to take all his best men, and even
urged him to do it, which advice, by the way, ought to have removed the
Major’s suspicion.
“But,” said Glenarvan, “our journey is not dangerous, is it?”
“Not at all,” replied Ayrton, quickly.
“Well then, we’ll have all the men we can on board. Hands will be wanted
to work the ship, and to help in the repairs. Besides, it is of the utmost
importance that she should meet us to the very day, at whatever place may be
ultimately selected. Consequently, we must not lessen her crew.”
Ayrton said nothing more, as if convinced his Lordship was right.
When evening came, Scotch and Irish separated. Ayrton and Paddy
O’Moore and family returned home. Horses and wagons were to be ready the
next day, and eight o’clock in the morning was fixed for starting.
Lady Helena and Mary Grant soon made their preparations. They had less
to do than Jacques Paganel, for he spent half the night in arranging, and
wiping, and rubbing up the lenses of his telescope. Of course, next morning he
slept on till the Major’s stentorian voice roused him.
The luggage was already conveyed to the farm, thanks to John Mangles,
and a boat was waiting to take the passengers. They were soon seated, and the
young captain gave his final orders to Tom Austin, his chief officer. He
impressed upon him that he was to wait at Melbourne for Lord Glenarvan’s
commands, and to obey them scrupulously, whatever they might be.
The old sailor told John he might rely on him, and, in the name of the men,
begged to offer his Lordship their best wishes for the success of this new
expedition.
A storm of hurrahs burst forth from the yacht as the boat rowed off. In ten
minutes the shore was reached, and a quarter of an hour afterward the
Irishman’s farm. All was ready. Lady Helena was enchanted with her
installation. The huge chariot, with its primitive wheels and massive planks,
pleased her particularly. The six bullocks, yoked in pairs, had a patriarchal air
about them which took her fancy. Ayrton, goad in hand, stood waiting the
orders of this new master.
“My word,” said Paganel, “this is a famous vehicle; it beats all the mailcoaches in the world. I don’t know a better fashion of traveling than in a
mountebank’s caravan—a movable house, which goes or stops wherever you
please. What can one wish better? The Samaratians understood that, and never
traveled in any other way.”
“Monsieur Paganel,” said Lady Helena, “I hope I shall have the pleasure of
seeing you in my SALONS.”
“Assuredly, madam, I should count it an honor. Have you fixed the day?”
“I shall be at home every day to my friends,” replied Lady Helena; “and
you are—”
“The most devoted among them all,” interrupted Paganel, gaily.
These mutual compliments were interrupted by the arrival of the seven
horses, saddled and ready. They were brought by Paddy’s sons, and Lord
Glenarvan paid the sum stipulated for his various purchases, adding his cordial
thanks, which the worthy Irishman valued at least as much as his golden
guineas.
The signal was given to start, and Lady Helena and Mary took their places
in the reserved compartment. Ayrton seated himself in front, and Olbinett
scrambled in among the luggage. The rest of the party, well armed with
carbines and revolvers, mounted their horses. Ayrton gave a peculiar cry, and
his team set off. The wagon shook and the planks creaked, and the axles grated
in the naves of the wheels; and before long the hospitable farm of the Irishman
was out of sight.
CHAPTER IX A COUNTRY OF PARADOXES
It was the 23d of December, 1864, a dull, damp, dreary month in the
northern hemisphere; but on the Australian continent it might be called June.
The hottest season of the year had already commenced, and the sun’s rays
were almost tropical, when Lord Glenarvan started on his new expedition.
Most fortunately the 37th parallel did not cross the immense deserts,
inaccessible regions, which have cost many martyrs to science already.
Glenarvan could never have encountered them. He had only to do with the
southern part of Australia—viz., with a narrow portion of the province of
Adelaide, with the whole of Victoria, and with the top of the reversed triangle
which forms New South Wales.
It is scarcely sixty-two miles from Cape Bernouilli to the frontiers of
Victoria. It was not above a two days’ march, and Ayrton reckoned on their
sleeping next night at Apsley, the most westerly town of Victoria.
The commencement of a journey is always marked by ardor, both in the
horses and the horsemen. This is well enough in the horsemen, but if the
horses are to go far, their speed must be moderated and their strength
husbanded. It was, therefore, fixed that the average journey every day should
not be more than from twenty-five to thirty miles.
Besides, the pace of the horses must be regulated by the slower pace of the
bullocks, truly mechanical engines which lose in time what they gain in power.
The wagon, with its passengers and provisions, was the very center of the
caravan, the moving fortress. The horsemen might act as scouts, but must
never be far away from it.
As no special marching order had been agreed upon, everybody was at
liberty to follow his inclinations within certain limits. The hunters could scour
the plain, amiable folks could talk to the fair occupants of the wagon, and
philosophers could philosophize. Paganel, who was all three combined, had to
be and was everywhere at once.
The march across Adelaide presented nothing of any particular interest. A
succession of low hills rich in dust, a long stretch of what they call in Australia
“bush,” several prairies covered with a small prickly bush, considered a great
dainty by the ovine tribe, embraced many miles. Here and there they noticed a
species of sheep peculiar to New Holland—sheep with pig’s heads, feeding
between the posts of the telegraph line recently made between Adelaide and
the coast.
Up to this time there had been a singular resemblance in the country to the
monotonous plains of the Argentine Pampas. There was the same grassy flat
soil, the same sharply-defined horizon against the sky. McNabbs declared they
had never changed countries; but Paganel told him to wait, and he would soon
see a difference. And on the faith of this assurance marvelous things were
expected by the whole party.
In this fashion, after a march of sixty miles in two days, the caravan
reached the parish of Apsley, the first town in the Province of Victoria in the
Wimerra district.
The wagon was put up at the Crown Inn. Supper was soon smoking on the
table. It consisted solely of mutton served up in various ways.
They all ate heartily, but talked more than they ate, eagerly asking Paganel
questions about the wonders of the country they were just beginning to
traverse. The amiable geographer needed no pressing, and told them first that
this part of it was called Australia Felix.
“Wrongly named!” he continued. “It had better have been called rich, for it
is true of countries, as individuals, that riches do not make happiness. Thanks
to her gold mines, Australia has been abandoned to wild devastating
adventurers. You will come across them when we reach the gold fields.”
“Is not the colony of Victoria of but a recent origin?” asked Lady
Glenarvan.
“Yes, madam, it only numbers thirty years of existence. It was on the 6th
of June, 1835, on a Tuesday—”
“At a quarter past seven in the evening,” put in the Major, who delighted in
teasing the Frenchman about his precise dates.
“No, at ten minutes past seven,” replied the geographer, gravely, “that
Batman and Falckner first began a settlement at Port Phillip, the bay on which
the large city of Melbourne now stands. For fifteen years the colony was part
of New South Wales, and recognized Sydney as the capital; but in 1851, she
was declared independent, and took the name of Victoria.”
“And has greatly increased in prosperity since then, I believe,” said
Glenarvan.
“Judge for yourself, my noble friend,” replied Paganel. “Here are the
numbers given by the last statistics; and let McNabbs say as he likes, I know
nothing more eloquent than statistics.”
“Go on,” said the Major.
“Well, then, in 1836, the colony of Port Phillip had 224 inhabitants. To-day
the province of Victoria numbers 550,000. Seven millions of vines produce
annually 121,000 gallons of wine. There are 103,000 horses spreading over the
plains, and 675,272 horned cattle graze in her wide-stretching pastures.”
“Is there not also a certain number of pigs?” inquired McNabbs.
“Yes, Major, 79,625.”
“And how many sheep?”
“7,115,943, McNabbs.”
“Including the one we are eating at this moment.”
“No, without counting that, since it is three parts devoured.”
“Bravo, Monsieur Paganel,” exclaimed Lady Helena, laughing heartily. “It
must be owned you are posted up in geographical questions, and my cousin
McNabbs need not try and find you tripping.”
“It is my calling, Madam, to know this sort of thing, and to give you the
benefit of my information when you please. You may therefore believe me
when I tell you that wonderful things are in store for you in this strange
country.”
“It does not look like it at present,” said McNabbs, on purpose to tease
Paganel.
“Just wait, impatient Major,” was his rejoinder. “You have hardly put your
foot on the frontier, when you turn round and abuse it. Well, I say and say
again, and will always maintain that this is the most curious country on the
earth. Its formation, and nature, and products, and climate, and even its future
disappearance have amazed, and are now amazing, and will amaze, all the
SAVANTS in the world. Think, my friends, of a continent, the margin of
which, instead of the center, rose out of the waves originally like a gigantic
ring, which encloses, perhaps, in its center, a sea partly evaporated, the waves
of which are drying up daily; where humidity does not exist either in the air or
in the soil; where the trees lose their bark every year, instead of their leaves;
where the leaves present their sides to the sun and not their face, and
consequently give no shade; where the wood is often incombustible, where
good-sized stones are dissolved by the rain; where the forests are low and the
grasses gigantic; where the animals are strange; where quadrupeds have beaks,
like the echidna, or ornithorhynchus, and naturalists have been obliged to
create a special order for them, called monotremes; where the kangaroos leap
on unequal legs, and sheep have pigs’ heads; where foxes fly about from tree
to tree; where the swans are black; where rats make nests; where the bowerbird opens her reception-rooms to receive visits from her feathered friends;
where the birds astonish the imagination by the variety of their notes and their
aptness; where one bird serves for a clock, and another makes a sound like a
postilion cracking of a whip, and a third imitates a knife-grinder, and a fourth
the motion of a pendulum; where one laughs when the sun rises, and another
cries when the sun sets! Oh, strange, illogical country, land of paradoxes and
anomalies, if ever there was one on earth—the learned botanist Grimard was
right when he said, ‘There is that Australia, a sort of parody, or rather a
defiance of universal laws in the face of the rest of the world.’”
Paganel’s tirade was poured forth in the most impetuous manner, and
seemed as if it were never coming to an end. The eloquent secretary of the
Geographical Society was no longer master of himself. He went on and on,
gesticulating furiously, and brandishing his fork to the imminent danger of his
neighbors. But at last his voice was drowned in a thunder of applause, and he
managed to stop.
Certainly after such an enumeration of Australian peculiarities, he might
have been left in peace but the Major said in the coolest tone possible: “And is
that all, Paganel?”
“No, indeed not,” rejoined the Frenchman, with renewed vehemence.
“What!” exclaimed Lady Helena; “there are more wonders still in
Australia?”
“Yes, Madam, its climate. It is even stranger than its productions.”
“Is it possible?” they all said.
“I am not speaking of the hygienic qualities of the climate,” continued
Paganel, “rich as it is in oxygen and poor in azote. There are no damp winds,
because the trade winds blow regularly on the coasts, and most diseases are
unknown, from typhus to measles, and chronic affections.”
“Still, that is no small advantage,” said Glenarvan.
“No doubt; but I am not referring to that, but to one quality it has which is
incomparable.”
“And what is that?”
“You will never believe me.”
“Yes, we will,” exclaimed his auditors, their curiosity aroused by this
preamble.
“Well, it is—”
“It is what?”
“It is a moral regeneration.”
“A moral regeneration?”
“Yes,” replied the SAVANT, in a tone of conviction. “Here metals do not
get rust on them by exposure to the air, nor men. Here the pure, dry
atmosphere whitens everything rapidly, both linen and souls. The virtue of the
climate must have been well known in England when they determined to send
their criminals here to be reformed.”
“What! do you mean to say the climate has really any such influence?”
said Lady Helena.
“Yes, Madam, both on animals and men.”
“You are not joking, Monsieur Paganel?”
“I am not, Madam. The horses and the cattle here are of incomparable
docility. You see it?”
“It is impossible!”
“But it is a fact. And the convicts transported into this reviving, salubrious
air, become regenerated in a few years. Philanthropists know this. In Australia
all natures grow better.”
“But what is to become of you then, Monsieur Paganel, in this privileged
country—you who are so good already?” said Lady Helena. “What will you
turn out?”
“Excellent, Madam, just excellent, and that’s all.”
CHAPTER X AN ACCIDENT
The next day, the 24th of December, they started at daybreak. The heat was
already considerable, but not unbearable, and the road was smooth and good,
and allowed the cavalcade to make speedy progress. In the evening they
camped on the banks of the White Lake, the waters of which are brackish and
undrinkable.
Jacques Paganel was obliged to own that the name of this lake was a
complete misnomer, for the waters were no more white than the Black Sea is
black, or the Red Sea red, or the Yellow River yellow, or the Blue Mountains
blue. However, he argued and disputed the point with all the amour propre of a
geographer, but his reasoning made no impression.
M. Olbinett prepared the evening meal with his accustomed punctuality,
and after this was dispatched, the travelers disposed themselves for the night
in the wagon and in the tent, and were soon sleeping soundly, notwithstanding
the melancholy howling of the “dingoes,” the jackals of Australia.
A magnificent plain, thickly covered with chrysanthemums, stretched out
beyond the lake, and Glenarvan and his friends would gladly have explored its
beauties when they awoke next morning, but they had to start. As far as the
eye could reach, nothing was visible but one stretch of prairie, enameled with
flower, in all the freshness and abundance of spring. The blue flowers of the
slender-leaved flax, combined with the bright hues of the scarlet acanthus, a
flower peculiar to the country.
A few cassowaries were bounding over the plain, but it was impossible to
get near them. The Major was fortunate enough, however, to hit one very rare
animal with a ball in the leg. This was the jabiru, a species which is fast
disappearing, the gigantic crane of the English colonies. This winged creature
was five feet high, and his wide, conical, extremely pointed beak, measured
eighteen inches in length. The violet and purple tints of his head contrasted
vividly with the glossy green of his neck, and the dazzling whiteness of his
throat, and the bright red of his long legs. Nature seems to have exhausted in
its favor all the primitive colors on her palette.
Great admiration was bestowed on this bird, and the Major’s spoil would
have borne the honors of the day, had not Robert come across an animal a few
miles further on, and bravely killed it. It was a shapeless creature, half
porcupine, half ant-eater, a sort of unfinished animal belonging to the first
stage of creation. A long glutinous extensible tongue hung out of his jaws in
search of the ants, which formed its principal food.
“It is an echidna,” said Paganel. “Have you ever seen such a creature?”
“It is horrible,” replied Glenarvan.
“Horrible enough, but curious, and, what’s more, peculiar to Australia. One
might search for it in vain in any other part of the world.”
Naturally enough, the geographer wished to preserve this interesting
specimen of monotremata, and wanted to stow it away in the luggage; but M.
Olbinett resented the idea so indignantly, that the SAVANT was obliged to
abandon his project.
About four o’clock in the afternoon, John Mangles descried an enormous
column of smoke about three miles off, gradually overspreading the whole
horizon. What could be the cause of this phenomenon? Paganel was inclined
to think it was some description of meteor, and his lively imagination was
already in search of an explanation, when Ayrton cut short all his conjectures
summarily, by announcing that the cloud of dust was caused by a drove of
cattle on the road.
The quartermaster proved right, for as the cloud came nearer, quite a
chorus of bleatings and neighings, and bel-lowings escaped from it, mingled
with the loud tones of a human voice, in the shape of cries, and whistles, and
vociferations.
Presently a man came out of the cloud. This was the leader-in-chief of the
four-footed army. Glenarvan advanced toward him, and friendly relations were
speedily established between them. The leader, or to give him his proper
designation, the stock-keeper, was part owner of the drove. His name was Sam
Machell, and he was on his way from the eastern provinces to Portland Bay.
The drove numbered 12,075 head in all, or l,000 bullocks, 11,000 sheep,
and 75 horses. All these had been bought in the Blue Mountains in a poor, lean
condition, and were going to be fatted up on the rich pasture lands of Southern
Australia, and sold again at a great profit. Sam Machell expected to get pounds
2 on each bullock, and 10s. on every sheep, which would bring him in pounds
3,750. This was doing good business; but what patience and energy were
required to conduct such a restive, stubborn lot to their destination, and what
fatigues must have to be endured. Truly the gain was hardly earned.
Sam Machell told his history in a few words, while the drove continued
their march among the groves of mimosas. Lady Helena and Mary and the rest
of the party seated themselves under the shade of a wide-spreading gum-tree,
and listened to his recital.
It was seven months since Sam Machell had started. He had gone at the
rate of ten miles a day, and his interminable journey would last three months
longer. His assistants in the laborious task comprised twenty dogs and thirty
men, five of whom were blacks, and very serviceable in tracking up any
strayed beasts. Six wagons made the rear-guard. All the men were armed with
stockwhips, the handles of which are eighteen inches long, and the lash nine
feet, and they move about among the ranks, bringing refractory animals back
into order, while the dogs, the light cavalry of the regiment, preserved
discipline in the wings.
The travelers were struck with the admirable arrangement of the drove.
The different stock were kept apart, for wild sheep and bullocks would not
have got on together at all. The bullocks would never have grazed where the
sheep had passed along, and consequently they had to go first, divided into
two battalions. Five regiments of sheep followed, in charge of twenty men,
and last of all came the horses.
Sam Machell drew the attention of his auditors to the fact that the real
guides of the drove were neither the men nor the dogs, but the oxen
themselves, beasts of superior intelligence, recognized as leaders by their
congenitors. They advanced in front with perfect gravity, choosing the best
route by instinct, and fully alive to their claim to respect. Indeed, they were
obliged to be studied and humored in everything, for the whole drove obeyed
them implicitly. If they took it into their heads to stop, it was a matter of
necessity to yield to their good pleasure, for not a single animal would move a
step till these leaders gave the signal to set off.
Sundry details, added by the stock-keeper, completed the history of this
expedition, worthy of being written, if not commended by Xenophon himself.
As long as the troop marched over the plains it was well enough, there was
little difficulty or fatigue. The animals fed as they went along, and slaked their
thirst at the numerous creeks that watered the plains, sleeping at night and
making good progress in the day, always obedient and tractable to the dogs.
But when they had to go through great forests and groves of eucalyptus and
mimosas, the difficulties increased. Platoons, battalions and regiments got all
mixed together or scattered, and it was a work of time to collect them again.
Should a “leader” unfortunately go astray, he had to be found, cost what it
might, on pain of a general disbandment, and the blacks were often long days
in quest of him, before their search was successful. During the heavy rains the
lazy beasts refused to stir, and when violent storms chanced to occur, the
creatures became almost mad with terror, and were seized with a wild,
disorderly panic.
However, by dint of energy and ambition, the stock-keeper triumphed over
these difficulties, incessantly renewed though they were. He kept steadily on;
mile after mile of plains and woods, and mountains, lay behind. But in
addition to all his other qualities, there was one higher than all that he
specially needed when they came to rivers. This was patience—patience that
could stand any trial, and not only could hold out for hours and days, but for
weeks. The stock-keeper would be himself forced to wait on the banks of a
stream that might have been crossed at once. There was nothing to hinder but
the obstinacy of the herd. The bullocks would taste the water and turn back.
The sheep fled in all directions, afraid to brave the liquid element. The stockkeeper hoped when night came he might manage them better, but they still
refused to go forward. The rams were dragged in by force, but the sheep
would not follow. They tried what thirst would do, by keeping them without
drink for several days, but when they were brought to the river again, they
simply quenched their thirst, and declined a more intimate acquaintance with
the water. The next expedient employed was to carry all the lambs over,
hoping the mothers would be drawn after them, moved by their cries. But the
lambs might bleat as pitifully as they liked, the mothers never stirred.
Sometimes this state of affairs would last a whole month, and the stock-keeper
would be driven to his wits’ end by his bleating, bellowing, neighing army.
Then all of a sudden, one fine day, without rhyme or reason, a detachment
would take it into their heads to make a start across, and the only difficulty
now was to keep the whole herd from rushing helter-skelter after them. The
wildest confusion set in among the ranks, and numbers of the animals were
drowned in the passage.
Such was the narrative of Sam Machell. During its recital, a considerable
part of the troop had filed past in good order. It was time for him to return to
his place at their head, that he might be able to choose the best pasturage.
Taking leave of Lord Glenarvan, he sprang on a capital horse of the native
breed, that one of his men held waiting for him, and after shaking hands
cordially with everybody all round, took his departure. A few minutes later,
nothing was visible of the stock-keeper and his troop but a cloud of dust.
The wagon resumed its course in the opposite direction, and did not stop
again till they halted for the night at the foot of Mount Talbot.
Paganel made the judicious observation that it was the 25th of December,
the Christmas Day so dear to English hearts. But the steward had not forgotten
it, and an appetizing meal was soon ready under the tent, for which he
deserved and received warm compliments from the guests. Indeed, M.
Olbinett had quite excelled himself on this occasion. He produced from his
stores such an array of European dishes as is seldom seen in the Australian
desert. Reindeer hams, slices of salt beef, smoked salmon, oat cakes, and
barley meal scones; tea ad libitum, and whisky in abundance, and several
bottles of port, composed this astonishing meal. The little party might have
thought themselves in the grand dining-hall of Malcolm Castle, in the heart of
the Highlands of Scotland.
The next day, at 11 A. M., the wagon reached the banks of the Wimerra on
the 143d meridian.
The river, half a mile in width, wound its limpid course between tall rows
of gum-trees and acacias. Magnificent specimens of the MYRTACEA, among
others, the metroside-ros speciosa, fifteen feet high, with long drooping
branches, adorned with red flowers. Thousands of birds, the lories, and
greenfinches, and gold-winged pigeons, not to speak of the noisy paroquets,
flew about in the green branches. Below, on the bosom of the water, were a
couple of shy and unapproachable black swans. This rara avis of the
Australian rivers soon disappeared among the windings of the Wimerra, which
water the charming landscape in the most capricious manner.
The wagon stopped on a grassy bank, the long fringes of which dipped in
the rapid current. There was neither raft nor bridge, but cross over they must.
Ayrton looked about for a practicable ford. About a quarter of a mile up the
water seemed shallower, and it was here they determined to try to pass over.
The soundings in different parts showed a depth of three feet only, so that the
wagon might safely enough venture.
“I suppose there is no other way of fording the river?” said Glenarvan to
the quartermaster.
“No, my Lord; but the passage does not seem dangerous. We shall manage
it.”
“Shall Lady Glenarvan and Miss Grant get out of the wagon?”
“Not at all. My bullocks are surefooted, and you may rely on me for
keeping them straight.”
“Very well, Ayrton; I can trust you.”
The horsemen surrounded the ponderous vehicle, and all stepped boldly
into the current. Generally, when wagons have to ford rivers, they have empty
casks slung all round them, to keep them floating on the water; but they had no
such swimming belt with them on this occasion, and they could only depend
on the sagacity of the animals and the prudence of Ayrton, who directed the
team. The Major and the two sailors were some feet in advance. Glenarvan
and John Mangles went at the sides of the wagon, ready to lend any assistance
the fair travelers might require, and Paganel and Robert brought up the rear.
All went well till they reached the middle of the Wimerra, but then the
hollow deepened, and the water rose to the middle of the wheels. The bullocks
were in danger of losing their footing, and dragging with them the oscillating
vehicle. Ayrton devoted himself to his task courageously. He jumped into the
water, and hanging on by the bullocks’ horns, dragged them back into the right
course.
Suddenly the wagon made a jolt that it was impossible to prevent; a crack
was heard, and the vehicle began to lean over in a most precarious manner.
The water now rose to the ladies’ feet; the whole concern began to float,
though John Mangles and Lord Glenarvan hung on to the side. It was an
anxious moment.
Fortunately a vigorous effort drove the wagon toward the opposite shore,
and the bank began to slope upward, so that the horses and bullocks were able
to regain their footing, and soon the whole party found themselves on the other
side, glad enough, though wet enough too.
The fore part of the wagon, however, was broken by the jolt, and
Glenarvan’s horse had lost a shoe.
This was an accident that needed to be promptly repaired. They looked at
each other hardly knowing what to do, till Ayrton proposed he should go to
Black Point Station, twenty miles further north, and bring back a blacksmith
with him.
“Yes, go, my good fellow,” said Glenarvan. “How long will it take you to
get there and back?”
“About fifteen hours,” replied Ayrton, “but not longer.”
“Start at once, then, and we will camp here, on the banks of the Wimerra,
till you return.”
CHAPTER XI CRIME OR CALAMITY
It was not without apprehension that the Major saw Ayrton quit the
Wimerra camp to go and look for a blacksmith at the Black Point Station. But
he did not breathe a word of his private misgivings, and contented himself
with watching the neighborhood of the river; nothing disturbed the repose of
those tranquil glades, and after a short night the sun reappeared on the horizon.
As to Glenarvan, his only fear was lest Ayrton should return alone. If they
fail to find a workman, the wagon could not resume the journey. This might
end in a delay of many days, and Glenarvan, impatient to succeed, could brook
no delay, in his eagerness to attain his object.
Ayrton luckily had lost neither his time nor his trouble. He appeared next
morning at daybreak, accompanied by a man who gave himself out as the
blacksmith from Black Point Station. He was a powerful fellow, and tall, but
his features were of a low, brutal type, which did not prepossess anyone in his
favor. But that was nothing, provided he knew his business. He scarcely spoke,
and certainly he did not waste his breath in useless words.
“Is he a good workman?” said John Mangles to the quartermaster.
“I know no more about him than you do, captain,” said Ayrton. “But we
shall see.”
The blacksmith set to work. Evidently that was his trade, as they could
plainly see from the way he set about repairing the forepart of the wagon. He
worked skilfully and with uncommon energy. The Major observed that the
flesh of his wrists was deeply furrowed, showing a ring of extravasated blood.
It was the mark of a recent injury, which the sleeve of an old woolen shirt
could not conceal. McNabbs questioned the blacksmith about those sores
which looked so painful. The man continued his work without answering. Two
hours more and the damage the carriage had sustained was made good. As to
Glenarvan’s horse, it was soon disposed of. The blacksmith had had the
forethought to bring the shoes with him. These shoes had a peculiarity which
did not escape the Major; it was a trefoil clumsily cut on the back part.
McNabbs pointed it out to Ayrton.
“It is the Black-Point brand,” said the quartermaster. “That enables them to
track any horses that may stray from the station, and prevents their being
mixed with other herds.”
The horse was soon shod. The blacksmith claimed his wage, and went off
without uttering four words.
Half an hour later, the travelers were on the road. Beyond the grove of
mimosas was a stretch of sparsely timbered country, which quite deserved its
name of “open plain.” Some fragments of quartz and ferruginous rock lay
among the scrub and the tall grass, where numerous flocks were feeding.
Some miles farther the wheels of the wagon plowed deep into the alluvial soil,
where irregular creeks murmured in their beds, half hidden among giant reeds.
By-and-by they skirted vast salt lakes, rapidly evaporating. The journey was
accomplished without trouble, and, indeed, without fatigue.
Lady Helena invited the horsemen of the party to pay her a visit in turns, as
her reception-room was but small, and in pleasant converse with this amiable
woman they forgot the fatigue of their day’s ride.
Lady Helena, seconded by Miss Mary, did the honors of their ambulatory
house with perfect grace. John Mangles was not forgotten in these daily
invitations, and his somewhat serious conversation was not unpleasing.
The party crossed, in a diagonal direction, the mail-coach road from
Crowland to Horsham, which was a very dusty one, and little used by
pedestrians.
The spurs of some low hills were skirted at the boundary of Talbot County,
and in the evening the travelers reached a point about three miles from
Maryborough. The fine rain was falling, which, in any other country, would
have soaked the ground; but here the air absorbed the moisture so wonderfully
that the camp did not suffer in the least.
Next day, the 29th of December, the march was delayed somewhat by a
succession of little hills, resembling a miniature Switzerland. It was a constant
repetition of up and down hill, and many a jolt besides, all of which were
scarcely pleasant. The travelers walked part of the way, and thought it no
hardship.
At eleven o’clock they arrived at Carisbrook, rather an important
municipality. Ayrton was for passing outside the town without going through
it, in order, he said, to save time. Glenarvan concurred with him, but Paganel,
always eager for novelties, was for visiting Carisbrook. They gave him his
way, and the wagon went on slowly.
Paganel, as was his custom, took Robert with him. His visit to the town
was very short, but it sufficed to give him an exact idea of Australian towns.
There was a bank, a court-house, a market, a church, and a hundred or so of
brick houses, all exactly alike. The whole town was laid out in squares,
crossed with parallel streets in the English fashion. Nothing could be more
simple, nothing less attractive. As the town grows, they lengthen the streets as
we lengthen the trousers of a growing child, and thus the original symmetry is
undisturbed.
Carisbrook was full of activity, a remarkable feature in these towns of
yesterday. It seems in Australia as if towns shot up like trees, owing to the heat
of the sun. Men of business were hurrying along the streets; gold buyers were
hastening to meet the in-coming escort; the precious metal, guarded by the
local police, was coming from the mines at Bendigo and Mount Alexander. All
the little world was so absorbed in its own interests, that the strangers passed
unobserved amid the laborious inhabitants.
After an hour devoted to visiting Carisbrook, the two visitors rejoined their
companions, and crossed a highly cultivated district. Long stretches of prairie,
known as the “Low Level Plains,” next met their gaze, dotted with countless
sheep, and shepherds’ huts. And then came a sandy tract, without any
transition, but with the abruptness of change so characteristic of Australian
scenery. Mount Simpson and Mount Terrengower marked the southern point
where the boundary of the Loddon district cuts the 144th meridian.
As yet they had not met with any of the aboriginal tribes living in the
savage state. Glenarvan wondered if the Australians were wanting in
Australia, as the Indians had been wanting in the Pampas of the Argentine
district; but Paganel told him that, in that latitude, the natives frequented
chiefly the Murray Plains, about one hundred miles to the eastward.
“We are now approaching the gold district,” said he, “in a day or two we
shall cross the rich region of Mount Alexander. It was here that the swarm of
diggers alighted in 1852; the natives had to fly to the interior. We are in
civilized districts without seeing any sign of it; but our road will, before the
day is over, cross the railway which connects the Murray with the sea. Well, I
must confess, a railway in Australia does seem to me an astonishing thing!”
“And pray, why, Paganel?” said Glenarvan.
“Why? because it jars on one’s ideas. Oh! I know you English are so used
to colonizing distant possessions. You, who have electric telegraphs and
universal exhibitions in New Zealand, you think it is all quite natural. But it
dumb-founders the mind of a Frenchman like myself, and confuses all one’s
notions of Australia!”
“Because you look at the past, and not at the present,” said John Mangles.
A loud whistle interrupted the discussion. The party were within a mile of
the railway. Quite a number of persons were hastening toward the railway
bridge. The people from the neighboring stations left their houses, and the
shepherds their flocks, and crowded the approaches to the railway. Every now
and then there was a shout, “The railway! the railway!”
Something serious must have occurred to produce such an agitation.
Perhaps some terrible accident.
Glenarvan, followed by the rest, urged on his horse. In a few minutes he
arrived at Camden Bridge and then he became aware of the cause of such an
excitement.
A fearful accident had occurred; not a collision, but a train had gone off the
line, and then there had been a fall. The affair recalled the worst disasters of
American railways. The river crossed by the railway was full of broken
carriages and the engine. Whether the weight of the train had been too much
for the bridge, or whether the train had gone off the rails, the fact remained
that five carriages out of six fell into the bed of the Loddon, dragged down by
the locomotive. The sixth carriage, miraculously preserved by the breaking of
the coupling chain, remained on the rails, six feet from the abyss. Below
nothing was discernible but a melancholy heap of twisted and blackened axles,
shattered wagons, bent rails, charred sleepers; the boiler, burst by the shock,
had scattered its plates to enormous distances. From this shapeless mass of
ruins flames and black smoke still rose. After the fearful fall came fire, more
fearful still! Great tracks of blood, scattered limbs, charred trunks of bodies,
showed here and there; none could guess how many victims lay dead and
mangled under those ruins.
Glenarvan, Paganel, the Major, Mangles, mixing with the crowd, heard the
current talk. Everyone tried to account for the accident, while doing his utmost
to save what could be saved.
“The bridge must have broken,” said one.
“Not a bit of it. The bridge is whole enough; they must have forgotten to
close it to let the train pass. That is all.”
It was, in fact, a swing bridge, which opened for the convenience of the
boats. Had the guard, by an unpardonable oversight, omitted to close it for the
passage of the train, so that the train, coming on at full speed, was precipitated
into the Loddon? This hypothesis seemed very admissible; for although onehalf of the bridge lay beneath the ruins of the train, the other half, drawn up to
the opposite shore, hung, still unharmed, by its chains. No one could doubt
that an oversight on the part of the guard had caused the catastrophe.
The accident had occurred in the night, to the express train which left
Melbourne at 11:45 in the evening. About a quarter past three in the morning,
twenty-five minutes after leaving Castlemaine, it arrived at Camden Bridge,
where the terrible disaster befell. The passengers and guards of the last and
only remaining carriage at once tried to obtain help. But the telegraph, whose
posts were lying on the ground, could not be worked. It was three hours before
the authorities from Castlemaine reached the scene of the accident, and it was
six o’clock in the morning when the salvage party was organized, under the
direction of Mr. Mitchell, the surveyor-general of the colony, and a
detachment of police, commanded by an inspector. The squatters and their
“hands” lent their aid, and directed their efforts first to extinguishing the fire
which raged in the ruined heap with unconquerable violence. A few
unrecognizable bodies lay on the slope of the embankment, but from that
blazing mass no living thing could be saved. The fire had done its work too
speedily. Of the passengers ten only survived—those in the last carriage. The
railway authorities sent a locomotive to bring them back to Castlemaine.
Lord Glenarvan, having introduced himself to the surveyor-general,
entered into conversation with him and the inspector of police. The latter was
a tall, thin man, im-perturbably cool, and, whatever he may have felt, allowed
no trace of it to appear on his features. He contemplated this calamity as a
mathematician does a problem; he was seeking to solve it, and to find the
unknown; and when Glenarvan observed, “This is a great misfortune,” he
quietly replied, “Better than that, my Lord.”
“Better than that?” cried Glenarvan. “I do not understand you.”
“It is better than a misfortune, it is a crime!” he replied, in the same quiet
tone.
Glenarvan looked inquiringly at Mr. Mitchell for a solution. “Yes, my
Lord,” replied the surveyor-general, “our inquiries have resulted in the
conclusion that the catastrophe is the result of a crime. The last luggage-van
has been robbed. The surviving passengers were attacked by a gang of five or
six villains. The bridge was intentionally opened, and not left open by the
negligence of the guard; and connecting with this fact the guard’s
disappearance, we may conclude that the wretched fellow was an accomplice
of these ruffians.”
The police-officer shook his head at this inference.
“You do not agree with me?” said Mr. Mitchell.
“No, not as to the complicity of the guard.”
“Well, but granting that complicity, we may attribute the crime to the
natives who haunt the Murray. Without him the blacks could never have
opened a swing-bridge; they know nothing of its mechanism.”
“Exactly so,” said the police-inspector.
“Well,” added Mr. Mitchell, “we have the evidence of a boatman whose
boat passed Camden Bridge at 10:40 P. M., that the bridge was properly shut
after he passed.”
“True.”
“Well, after that I cannot see any doubt as to the complicity of the guard.”
The police-officer shook his head gently, but continuously.
“Then you don’t attribute the crime to the natives?”
“Not at all.”
“To whom then?”
Just at this moment a noise was heard from about half a mile up the river.
A crowd had gathered, and quickly increased. They soon reached the station,
and in their midst were two men carrying a corpse. It was the body of the
guard, quite cold, stabbed to the heart. The murderers had no doubt hoped, by
dragging their victim to a distance, that the police would be put on a wrong
scent in their first inquiries. This discovery, at any rate, justified the doubts of
the police-inspector. The poor blacks had had no hand in the matter.
“Those who dealt that blow,” said he, “were already well used to this little
instrument”; and so saying he produced a pair of “darbies,” a kind of handcuff
made of a double ring of iron secured by a lock. “I shall soon have the
pleasure of presenting them with these bracelets as a New Year’s gift.”
“Then you suspect—”
“Some folks who came out free in Her Majesty’s ships.”
“What! convicts?” cried Paganel, who recognized the formula employed in
the Australian colonies.
“I thought,” said Glenarvan, “convicts had no right in the province of
Victoria.”
“Bah!” said the inspector, “if they have no right, they take it! They escape
sometimes, and, if I am not greatly mistaken, this lot have come straight from
Perth, and, take my word for it, they will soon be there again.”
Mr. Mitchell nodded acquiescence in the words of the police-inspector. At
this moment the wagon arrived at the level crossing of the railway. Glenarvan
wished to spare the ladies the horrible spectacle at Camden Bridge. He took
courteous leave of the surveyor-general, and made a sign to the rest to follow
him. “There is no reason,” said he, “for delaying our journey.”
When they reached the wagon, Glenarvan merely mentioned to Lady
Helena that there had been a railway accident, without a hint of the crime that
had played so great a part in it; neither did he make mention of the presence of
a band of convicts in the neighborhood, reserving that piece of information
solely for Ayrton’s ear. The little procession now crossed the railway some two
hundred yards below the bridge, and then resumed their eastward course.
CHAPTER XII TOLINE OF THE LACHLAN
About two miles from the railway, the plain terminated in a range of low
hills, and it was not long before the wagon entered a succession of narrow
gorges and capricious windings, out of which it emerged into a most charming
region, where grand trees, not closely planted, but in scattered groups, were
growing with absolutely tropical luxuriance. As the party drove on they
stumbled upon a little native boy lying fast asleep beneath the shade of a
magnificent banksia. He was dressed in European garb, and seemed about
eight years of age. There was no mistaking the characteristic features of his
race; the crisped hair, the nearly black skin, the flattened nose, the thick lips,
the unusual length of the arms, immediately classed him among the aborigines
of the interior. But a degree of intelligence appeared in his face that showed
some educational influences must have been at work on his savage, untamed
nature.
Lady Helena, whose interest was greatly excited by this spectacle, got out
of the wagon, followed by Mary, and presently the whole company surrounded
the peaceful little sleeper. “Poor child!” said Mary Grant. “Is he lost, I wonder,
in this desert?”
“I suppose,” said Lady Helena, “he has come a long way to visit this part.
No doubt some he loves are here.”
“But he can’t be left here,” added Robert. “We must—”
His compassionate sentence remained unfinished, for, just at that moment
the child turned over in his sleep, and, to the extreme surprise of everybody,
there was a large label on his shoulders, on which the following was written:
TOLINE.
To be conducted to Echuca.
Care of Jeffries Smith, Railway Porter.
Prepaid.
“That’s the English all over!” exclaimed Paganel. “They send off a child
just as they would luggage, and book him like a parcel. I heard it was done,
certainly; but I could not believe it before.”
“Poor child!” said Lady Helena. “Could he have been in the train that got
off the line at Camden Bridge? Perhaps his parents are killed, and he is left
alone in the world!”
“I don’t think so, madam,” replied John Mangles. “That card rather goes to
prove he was traveling alone.”
“He is waking up!” said Mary.
And so he was. His eyes slowly opened and then closed again, pained by
the glare of light. But Lady Helena took his hand, and he jumped up at once
and looked about him in bewilderment at the sight of so many strangers. He
seemed half frightened at first, but the presence of Lady Helena reassured him.
“Do you understand English, my little man?” asked the young lady.
“I understand it and speak it,” replied the child in fluent enough English,
but with a marked accent. His pronunciation was like a Frenchman’s.
“What is your name?” asked Lady Helena.
“Toline,” replied the little native.
“Toline!” exclaimed Paganel. “Ah! I think that means ‘bark of a tree’ in
Australian.”
Toline nodded, and looked again at the travelers.
“Where do you come from?” inquired Lady Helena.
“From Melbourne, by the railway from Sandhurst.”
“Were you in the accident at Camden Bridge?” said Glenarvan.
“Yes, sir,” was Toline’s reply; “but the God of the Bible protected me.”
“Are you traveling alone?”
“Yes, alone; the Reverend Paxton put me in charge of Jeffries Smith; but
unfortunately the poor man was killed.”
“And you did not know any one else on the train?”
“No one, madam; but God watches over children and never forsakes
them.”
Toline said this in soft, quiet tones, which went to the heart. When he
mentioned the name of God his voice was grave and his eyes beamed with all
the fervor that animated his young soul.
This religious enthusiasm at so tender an age was easily explained. The
child was one of the aborigines baptized by the English missionaries, and
trained by them in all the rigid principles of the Methodist Church. His calm
replies, proper behavior, and even his somber garb made him look like a little
reverend already.
But where was he going all alone in these solitudes and why had he left
Camden Bridge? Lady Helena asked him about this.
“I was returning to my tribe in the Lachlan,” he replied. “I wished to see
my family again.”
“Are they Australians?” inquired John Mangles.
“Yes, Australians of the Lachlan,” replied Toline.
“Have you a father and mother?” said Robert Grant.
“Yes, my brother,” replied Toline, holding out his hand to little Grant.
Robert was so touched by the word brother that he kissed the black child, and
they were friends forthwith.
The whole party were so interested in these replies of the little Australian
savage that they all sat round him in a listening group. But the sun had
meantime sunk behind the tall trees, and as a few miles would not greatly
retard their progress, and the spot they were in would be suitable for a halt,
Glenarvan gave orders to prepare their camp for the night at once. Ayrton
unfastened the bullocks and turned them out to feed at will. The tent was
pitched, and Olbinett got the supper ready. Toline consented, after some
difficulty, to share it, though he was hungry enough. He took his seat beside
Robert, who chose out all the titbits for his new friend. Toline accepted them
with a shy grace that was very charming.
The conversation with him, however, was still kept up, for everyone felt an
interest in the child, and wanted to talk to him and hear his history. It was
simple enough. He was one of the poor native children confided to the care of
charitable societies by the neighboring tribes. The Australian aborigines are
gentle and inoffensive, never exhibiting the fierce hatred toward their
conquerors which characterizes the New Zealanders, and possibly a few of the
races of Northern Australia. They often go to the large towns, such as
Adelaide, Sydney and Melbourne, and walk about in very primitive costume.
They go to barter their few articles of industry, hunting and fishing
implements, weapons, etc., and some of the chiefs, from pecuniary motives,
no doubt, willingly leave their children to profit by the advantages of a
gratuitous education in English.
This was how Toline’s parents had acted. They were true Australian
savages living in the Lachlan, a vast region lying beyond the Murray. The
child had been in Melbourne five years, and during that time had never once
seen any of his own people. And yet the imperishable feeling of kindred was
still so strong in his heart that he had dared to brave this journey over the wilds
to visit his tribe once more, scattered though perchance it might be, and his
family, even should he find it decimated.
“And after you have kissed your parents, are you coming back to
Melbourne?” asked Lady Glenarvan.
“Yes, Madam,” replied Toline, looking at the lady with a loving
expression.
“And what are you going to be some day?” she continued.
“I am going to snatch my brothers from misery and ignorance. I am going
to teach them, to bring them to know and love God. I am going to be a
missionary.”
Words like those, spoken with such animation from a child of only eight
years, might have provoked a smile in light, scoffing auditors, but they were
understood and appreciated by the grave Scotch, who admired the courage of
this young disciple, already armed for the battle. Even Paganel was stirred to
the depths of his heart, and felt his warmer sympathy awakened for the poor
child.
To speak the truth, up to that moment he did not care much for a savage in
European attire. He had not come to Australia to see Australians in coats and
trousers. He preferred them simply tattooed, and this conventional dress jarred
on his preconceived notions. But the child’s genuine religious fervor won him
over completely. Indeed, the wind-up of the conversation converted the worthy
geographer into his best friend.
It was in reply to a question Lady Helena had asked, that Toline said he
was studying at the Normal School in Melbourne, and that the principal was
the Reverend Mr. Paxton.
“And what do they teach you?” she went on to say.
“They teach me the Bible, and mathematics, and geography.”
Paganel pricked up his ears at this, and said, “Indeed, geography!”
“Yes, sir,” said Toline; “and I had the first prize for geography before the
Christmas holidays.”
“You had the first prize for geography, my boy?”
“Yes, sir. Here it is,” returned Toline, pulling a book out of his pocket.
It was a bible, 32mo size, and well bound. On the first page was written the
words: “Normal School, Melbourne. First Prize for Geography. Toline of the
Lachlan.”
Paganel was beside himself. An Australian well versed in geography. This
was marvelous, and he could not help kissing Toline on both cheeks, just as if
he had been the Reverend Mr. Paxton himself, on the day of the distribution of
prizes. Paganel need not have been so amazed at this circumstance, however,
for it is frequent enough in Australian schools. The little savages are very
quick in learning geography. They learn it eagerly, and on the other hand, are
perfectly averse to the science of arithmetic.
Toline could not understand this outburst of affection on the part of the
Frenchman, and looked so puzzled that Lady Helena thought she had better
inform him that Paganel was a celebrated geographer and a distinguished
professor on occasion.
“A professor of geography!” cried Toline. “Oh, sir, do question me!”
“Question you? Well, I’d like nothing better. Indeed, I was going to do it
without your leave. I should very much like to see how they teach geography
in the Normal School of Melbourne.”
“And suppose Toline trips you up, Paganel!” said McNabbs.
“What a likely idea!” exclaimed the geographer. “Trip up the Secretary of
the Geographical Society of France.”
Their examination then commenced, after Paganel had settled his
spectacles firmly on his nose, drawn himself up to his full height, and put on a
solemn voice becoming to a professor.
“Pupil Toline, stand up.”
As Toline was already standing, he could not get any higher, but he waited
modestly for the geographer’s questions.
“Pupil Toline, what are the five divisions of the globe?”
“Oceanica, Asia, Africa, America, and Europe.”
“Perfectly so. Now we’ll take Oceanica first; where are we at this moment?
What are the principal divisions?”
“Australia, belonging to the English; New Zealand, belonging to the
English; Tasmania, belonging to the English. The islands of Chatham,
Auckland, Macquarie, Kermadec, Makin, Maraki, are also belonging to the
English.”
“Very good, and New Caledonia, the Sandwich Islands, the Mendana, the
Pomotou?”
“They are islands under the Protectorate of Great Britain.”
“What!” cried Paganel, “under the Protectorate of Great Britain. I rather
think on the contrary, that France—”
“France,” said the child, with an astonished look.
“Well, well,” said Paganel; “is that what they teach you in the Melbourne
Normal School?”
“Yes, sir. Isn’t it right?”
“Oh, yes, yes, perfectly right. All Oceanica belongs to the English. That’s
an understood thing. Go on.”
Paganel’s face betrayed both surprise and annoyance, to the great delight
of the Major.
“Let us go on to Asia,” said the geographer.
“Asia,” replied Toline, “is an immense country. Capital—Calcutta. Chief
Towns—Bombay, Madras, Calicut, Aden, Malacca, Singapore, Pegu,
Colombo. The Lacca-dive Islands, the Maldives, the Chagos, etc., belonging
to the English.”
“Very good, pupil Toline. And now for Africa.”
“Africa comprises two chief colonies—the Cape on the south, capital
Capetown; and on the west the English settlements, chief city, Sierra Leone.”
“Capital!” said Paganel, beginning to enter into this perfectly taught but
Anglo-colored fanciful geography. “As to Algeria, Morocco, Egypt—they are
all struck out of the Britannic cities.”
“Let us pass on, pray, to America.”
“It is divided,” said Toline, promptly, “into North and South America. The
former belongs to the English in Canada, New Brunswick, New Scotland, and
the United States, under the government of President Johnson.”
“President Johnson,” cried Paganel, “the successor of the great and good
Lincoln, assassinated by a mad fanatic of the slave party. Capital; nothing
could be better. And as to South America, with its Guiana, its archipelago of
South Shetland, its Georgia, Jamaica, Trinidad, etc., that belongs to the
English, too! Well, I’ll not be the one to dispute that point! But, Toline, I
should like to know your opinion of Europe, or rather your professor’s.”
“Europe?” said Toline not at all understanding Paganel’s excitement.
“Yes, Europe! Who does Europe belong to?”
“Why, to the English,” replied Toline, as if the fact was quite settled.
“I much doubt it,” returned Paganel. “But how’s that, Toline, for I want to
know that?”
“England, Ireland, Scotland, Malta, Jersey and Guern-sey, the Ionian
Islands, the Hebrides, the Shetlands, and the Orkneys.”
“Yes, yes, my lad; but there are other states you forgot to mention.”
“What are they?” replied the child, not the least disconcerted.
“Spain, Russia, Austria, Prussia, France,” answered Paganel.
“They are provinces, not states,” said Toline.
“Well, that beats all!” exclaimed Paganel, tearing off his spectacles.
“Yes,” continued the child. “Spain—capital, Gibraltar.”
“Admirable! perfect! sublime! And France, for I am French, and I should
like to know to whom I belong.”
“France,” said Toline, quietly, “is an English province; chief city, Calais.”
“Calais!” cried Paganel. “So you think Calais still belongs to the English?”
“Certainly.”
“And that it is the capital of France?”
“Yes, sir; and it is there that the Governor, Lord Napo-leon, lives.”
This was too much for Paganel’s risible faculties. He burst out laughing.
Toline did not know what to make of him. He had done his best to answer
every question put to him. But the singularity of the answers were not his
blame; indeed, he never imagined anything singular about them. However, he
took it all quietly, and waited for the professor to recover himself. These peals
of laughter were quite incomprehensible to him.
“You see,” said Major McNabbs, laughing, “I was right. The pupil could
enlighten you after all.”
“Most assuredly, friend Major,” replied the geographer. “So that’s the way
they teach geography in Melbourne! They do it well, these professors in the
Normal School! Europe, Asia, Africa, America, Oceanica, the whole world
belongs to the English. My conscience! with such an ingenious education it is
no wonder the natives submit. Ah, well, Toline, my boy, does the moon belong
to England, too?”
“She will, some day,” replied the young savage, gravely.
This was the climax. Paganel could not stand any more. He was obliged to
go away and take his laugh out, for he was actually exploding with mirth, and
he went fully a quarter of a mile from the encampment before his equilibrium
was restored.
Meanwhile, Glenarvan looked up a geography they had brought among
their books. It was “Richardson’s Compendium,” a work in great repute in
England, and more in agreement with modern science than the manual in use
in the Normal School in Melbourne.
“Here, my child,” he said to Toline, “take this book and keep it. You have a
few wrong ideas about geography, which it would be well for you to rectify. I
will give you this as a keepsake from me.”
Toline took the book silently; but, after examining it attentively, he shook
his head with an air of incredulity, and could not even make up his mind to put
it in his pocket.
By this time night had closed in; it was 10 P. M. and time to think of rest, if
they were to start betimes next day. Robert offered his friend Toline half his
bed, and the little fellow accepted it. Lady Helena and Mary Grant withdrew
to the wagon, and the others lay down in the tent, Paganel’s merry peals still
mingling with the low, sweet song of the wild magpie.
But in the morning at six o’clock, when the sunshine wakened the sleepers,
they looked in vain for the little Australian. Toline had disappeared. Was he in
haste to get to the Lachlan district? or was he hurt by Paganel’s laughter? No
one could say.
But when Lady Helena opened her eyes she discovered a fresh branch of
mimosa leaves lying across her, and Paganel found a book in his vest pocket,
which turned out to be “Richardson’s Geography.”
CHAPTER XIII A WARNING
On the 2d of January, at sunrise, the travelers forded the Colban and the
Caupespe rivers. The half of their journey was now accomplished. In fifteen
days more, should their journey continue to be prosperous, the little party
would reach Twofold Bay.
They were all in good health. All that Paganel said of the hygienic qualities
of the climate was realized. There was little or no humidity, and the heat was
quite bearable. Neither horses nor bullocks could complain of it any more than
human beings. The order of the march had been changed in one respect since
the affair of Camden Bridge. That criminal catastrophe on the railway made
Ayrton take sundry precautions, which had hitherto been unnecessary. The
hunters never lost sight of the wagon, and whenever they camped, one was
always placed on watch. Morning and evening the firearms were primed
afresh. It was certain that a gang of ruffians was prowling about the country,
and though there was no cause for actual fear, it was well to be ready for
whatever might happen.
It need hardly be said these precautions were adopted without the
knowledge of Lady Helena and Mary Grant, as Lord Glenarvan did not wish
to alarm them.
They were by no means unnecessary, however, for any imprudence or
carelessness might have cost the travelers dear. Others beside Glenarvan were
on their guard. In lonely settlements and on stations, the inhabitants and the
squatters prepared carefully against any attack or surprise. Houses are closed
at nightfall; the dogs let loose inside the fences, barked at the slightest sound.
Not a single shepherd on horseback gathered his numerous flocks together at
close of day, without having a carbine slung from his saddle.
The outrage at Camden Bridge was the reason for all this, and many a
colonist fastened himself in with bolts and bars now at dusk, who used to sleep
with open doors and windows.
The Government itself displayed zeal and prudence, especially in the Postoffice department. On this very day, just as Glenarvan and his party were on
their way from Kilmore to Heathcote, the mail dashed by at full speed; but
though the horses were at a gallop, Glenarvan caught sight of the glittering
weapons of the mounted police that rode by its side, as they swept past in a
cloud of dust. The travelers might have fancied themselves back in those
lawless times when the discovery of the first gold-fields deluged the
Australian continent with the scum of Europe.
A mile beyond the road to Kilmore, the wagon, for the first time since
leaving Cape Bernouilli, struck into one of those forests of gigantic trees
which extend over a super-fices of several degrees. A cry of admiration
escaped the travelers at the sight of the eucalyptus trees, two hundred feet
high, with tough bark five inches thick. The trunks, measuring twenty feet
round, and furrowed with foamy streaks of an odorous resin, rose one hundred
and fifty feet above the soil. Not a branch, not a twig, not a stray shoot, not
even a knot, spoilt the regularity of their outline. They could not have come
out smoother from the hands of a turner. They stood like pillars all molded
exactly alike, and could be counted by hundreds. At an enormous height they
spread out in chaplets of branches, rounded and adorned at their extremity
with alternate leaves. At the axle of these leaves solitary flowers drooped
down, the calyx of which resembles an inverted urn.
Under this leafy dome, which never lost its greenness, the air circulated
freely, and dried up the dampness of the ground. Horses, cattle, and wagon
could easily pass between the trees, for they were standing in wide rows, and
parceled out like a wood that was being felled. This was neither like the
densely-packed woods choked up with brambles, nor the virgin forest
barricaded with the trunks of fallen trees, and overgrown with inextricable
tangles of creepers, where only iron and fire could open up a track. A grassy
carpet at the foot of the trees, and a canopy of verdure above, long
perspectives of bold colors, little shade, little freshness at all, a peculiar light,
as if the rays came through a thin veil, dappled lights and shades sharply
reflected on the ground, made up a whole, and constituted a peculiar spectacle
rich in novel effects. The forests of the Oceanic continent do not in the least
resemble the forests of the New World; and the Eucalyptus, the “Tara” of the
aborigines, belonging to the family of MYRTACEA, the different varieties of
which can hardly be enumerated, is the tree par excellence of the Australian
flora.
The reason of the shade not being deep, nor the darkness profound, under
these domes of verdure, was that these trees presented a curious anomaly in
the disposition of the leaves. Instead of presenting their broad surface to the
sunlight, only the side is turned. Only the profile of the leaves is seen in this
singular foliage. Consequently the sun’s rays slant down them to the earth, as
if through the open slants of a Venetian blind.
Glenarvan expressed his surprise at this circumstance, and wondered what
could be the cause of it. Paganel, who was never at a loss for an answer,
immediately replied:
“What astonishes me is not the caprice of nature. She knows what she is
about, but botanists don’t always know what they are saying. Nature made no
mistake in giving this peculiar foliage to the tree, but men have erred in calling
them EUCALYPTUS.”
“What does the word mean?” asked Mary Grant.
“It comes from a Greek word, meaning I cover well. They took care to
commit the mistake in Greek, that it might not be so self-evident, for anyone
can see that the ecualyptus covers badly.”
“I agree with you there,” said Glenarvan; “but now tell us, Paganel, how it
is that the leaves grow in this fashion?”
“From a purely physical cause, friends,” said Paganel, “and one that you
will easily understand. In this country where the air is dry and rain seldom
falls, and the ground is parched, the trees have no need of wind or sun.
Moisture lacking, sap is lacking also. Hence these narrow leaves, which seek
to defend themselves against the light, and prevent too great evaporation. This
is why they present the profile and not the face to the sun’s rays. There is
nothing more intelligent than a leaf.”
“And nothing more selfish,” added the Major. “These only thought of
themselves, and not at all of travelers.”
Everyone inclined to the opinion of McNabbs except Paganel, who
congratulated himself on walking under shadeless trees, though all the time he
was wiping the perspiration from his forehead. However, this disposition of
foliage was certainly to be regretted, for the journey through the forest was
often long and painful, as the traveler had no protection whatever against the
sun’s fierce rays.
The whole of this day the wagon continued to roll along through
interminable rows of eucalyptus, without meeting either quadruped or native.
A few cockatoos lived in the tops of the trees, but at such a height they could
scarcely be distinguished, and their noisy chatter was changed into an
imperceptible murmur. Occasionally a swarm of par-roquets flew along a
distant path, and lighted it up for an instant with gay colors; but otherwise,
solemn silence reigned in this vast green temple, and the tramp of the horses, a
few words exchanged with each other by the riders, the grinding noise of the
wheels, and from time to time a cry from Ayrton to stir up his lazy team, were
the only sounds which disturbed this immense solitude.
When night came they camped at the foot of some eucalyptus, which bore
marks of a comparatively recent fire. They looked like tall factory chimneys,
for the flame had completely hollowed them out their whole length. With the
thick bark still covering them, they looked none the worse. However, this bad
habit of squatters or natives will end in the destruction of these magnificent
trees, and they will disappear like the cedars of Lebanon, those world
monuments burnt by unlucky camp fires.
Olbinett, acting on Paganel’s advice, lighted his fire to prepare supper in
one of these tubular trunks. He found it drew capitally, and the smoke was lost
in the dark foliage above. The requisite precautions were taken for the night,
and Ayrton, Mulrady, Wilson and John Mangles undertook in turn to keep
watch until sunrise.
On the 3d of January, all day long, they came to nothing but the same
symmetrical avenues of trees; it seemed as if they never were going to end.
However, toward evening the ranks of trees began to thin, and on a little plain
a few miles off an assemblage of regular houses.
“Seymour!” cried Paganel; “that is the last town we come to in the
province of Victoria.”
“Is it an important one?” asked Lady Helena.
“It is a mere village, madam, but on the way to become a municipality.”
“Shall we find a respectable hotel there?” asked Glenarvan.
“I hope so,” replied Paganel.
“Very well; let us get on to the town, for our fair travelers, with all their
courage, will not be sorry, I fancy, to have a good night’s rest.”
“My dear Edward, Mary and I will accept it gladly, but only on the
condition that it will cause no delay, or take us the least out of the road.”
“It will do neither,” replied Lord Glenarvan. “Besides, our bullocks are
fatigued, and we will start to-morrow at daybreak.”
It was now nine o’clock; the moon was just beginning to rise, but her rays
were only slanting yet, and lost in the mist. It was gradually getting dark when
the little party entered the wide streets of Seymour, under Paganel’s guidance,
who seemed always to know what he had never seen; but his instinct led him
right, and he walked straight to Campbell’s North British Hotel.
The Major without even leaving the hotel, was soon aware that fear
absorbed the inhabitants of the little town. Ten minutes’ conversation with
Dickson, the loquacious landlord, made him completely acquainted with the
actual state of affairs; but he never breathed a word to any one.
When supper was over, though, and Lady Glenarvan, and Mary, and
Robert had retired, the Major detained his companions a little, and said, “They
have found out the perpetrators of the crime on the Sandhurst railroad.”
“And are they arrested?” asked Ayrton, eagerly.
“No,” replied McNabbs, without apparently noticing the EMPRESSMENT
of the quartermaster—an EMPRESSMENT which, moreover, was reasonable
enough under the circumstances.
“So much the worse,” replied Ayrton.
“Well,” said Glenarvan, “who are the authors of the crime?”
“Read,” replied the Major, offering Glenarvan a copy of the Australian and
New Zealand Gazette, “and you will see that the inspector of the police was
not mistaken.”
Glenarvan read aloud the following message:
SYDNEY, Jan. 2, 1866.
It will be remembered that on the night of the 29th or 30th of last
December there was an accident at Camden Bridge, five miles beyond the
station at Castlemaine, on the railway from Melbourne to Sandhurst. The night
express, 11.45, dashing along at full speed, was precipitated into the Loddon
River.
Camden Bridge had been left open. The numerous robberies committed
after the accident, the body of the guard picked up about half a mile from
Camden Bridge, proved that this catastrophe was the result of a crime.
Indeed, the coroner’s inquest decided that the crime must be attributed to
the band of convicts which escaped six months ago from the Penitentiary at
Perth, Western Australia, just as they were about to be transferred to Norfolk
Island.
The gang numbers twenty-nine men; they are under the command of a
certain Ben Joyce, a criminal of the most dangerous class, who arrived in
Australia a few months ago, by what ship is not known, and who has hitherto
succeeded in evading the hands of justice.
The inhabitants of towns, colonists and squatters at stations, are hereby
cautioned to be on their guard, and to communicate to the Surveyor-General
any information that may aid his search. J. P. MITCHELL, S. G.
When Glenarvan had finished reading this article, McNabbs turned to the
geographer and said, “You see, Paganel, there can be convicts in Australia.”
“Escaped convicts, that is evident,” replied Paganel, “but not regularly
transported criminals. Those fellows have no business here.”
“Well, they are here, at any rate,” said Glenarvan; “but I don’t suppose the
fact need materially alter our arrangements. What do you think, John?”
John Mangles did not reply immediately; he hesitated between the sorrow
it would cause the two children to give up the search, and the fear of
compromising the expedition.
“If Lady Glenarvan, and Miss Grant were not with us,” he said, “I should
not give myself much concern about these wretches.”
Glenarvan understood him and added, “Of course I need not say that it is
not a question of giving up our task; but would it perhaps be prudent, for the
sake of our companions, to rejoin the DUNCAN at Melbourne, and proceed
with our search for traces of Harry Grant on the eastern side. What do you
think of it, McNabbs?”
“Before I give my opinion,” replied the Major, “I should like to hear
Ayrton’s.”
At this direct appeal, the quartermaster looked at Glenarvan, and said, “I
think we are two hundred miles from Melbourne, and that the danger, if it
exists, is as great on the route to the south as on the route to the east. Both are
little frequented, and both will serve us. Besides, I do not think that thirty
scoundrels can frighten eight well-armed, determined men. My advice, then, is
to go forward.”
“And good advice too, Ayrton,” replied Paganel. “By going on we may
come across the traces of Captain Grant. In returning south, on the contrary,
we turn our backs to them. I think with you, then, and I don’t care a snap for
these escaped fellows. A brave man wouldn’t care a bit for them!”
Upon this they agreed with the one voice to follow their original
programme.
“Just one thing, my Lord,” said Ayrton, when they were about to separate.
“Say on, Ayrton.”
“Wouldn’t it be advisable to send orders to the DUNCAN to be at the
coast?”
“What good would that be,” replied John Mangles. “When we reach
Twofold Bay it will be time enough for that. If any unexpected event should
oblige us to go to Melbourne, we might be sorry not to find the DUNCAN
there. Besides, her injuries can not be repaired yet. For these reasons, then, I
think it would be better to wait.”
“All right,” said Ayrton, and forbore to press the matter further.
CHAPTER XIV WEALTH IN THE WILDERNESS
On January 6, at 7 A. M., after a tranquil night passed in longitude 146
degrees 15”, the travelers continued their journey across the vast district. They
directed their course steadily toward the rising sun, and made a straight line
across the plain. Twice over they came upon the traces of squatters going
toward the north, and their different footprints became confused, and
Glenarvan’s horse no longer left on the dust the Blackpoint mark, recognizable
by its double shamrock.
The plain was furrowed in some places by fantastic winding creeks
surrounded by box, and whose waters were rather temporary than permanent.
They originated in the slopes of the Buffalo Ranges, a chain of mountains of
moderate height, the undulating line of which was visible on the horizon. It
was resolved to camp there the same night. Ayrton goaded on his team, and
after a journey of thirty-five miles, the bullocks arrived, somewhat fatigued.
The tent was pitched beneath the great trees, and as night had drawn on supper
was served as quickly as possible, for all the party cared more for sleeping
than eating, after such a day’s march.
Paganel who had the first watch did not lie down, but shouldered his rifle
and walked up and down before the camp, to keep himself from going to
sleep. In spite of the absence of the moon, the night was almost luminous with
the light of the southern constellations. The SAVANT amused himself with
reading the great book of the firmament, a book which is always open, and full
of interest to those who can read it. The profound silence of sleeping nature
was only interrupted by the clanking of the hobbles on the horses’ feet.
Paganel was engrossed in his astronomical meditations, and thinking more
about the celestial than the terrestrial world, when a distant sound aroused him
from his reverie. He listened attentively, and to his great amaze, fancied he
heard the sounds of a piano. He could not be mistaken, for he distinctly heard
chords struck.
“A piano in the wilds!” said Paganel to himself. “I can never believe it is
that.”
It certainly was very surprising, but Paganel found it easier to believe it
was some Australian bird imitating the sounds of a Pleyel or Erard, as others
do the sounds of a clock or mill. But at this very moment, the notes of a clear
ringing voice rose on the air. The PIANIST was accompanied by singing. Still
Paganel was unwilling to be convinced. However, next minute he was forced
to admit the fact, for there fell on his ear the sublime strains of Mozart’s “Il
mio tesoro tanto” from Don Juan.
“Well, now,” said the geographer to himself, “let the Australian birds be as
queer as they may, and even granting the paroquets are the most musical in the
world, they can’t sing Mozart!”
He listened to the sublime inspiration of the great master to the end. The
effect of this soft melody on the still clear night was indescribable. Paganel
remained as if spellbound for a time; the voice ceased and all was silence.
When Wilson came to relieve the watch, he found the geographer plunged into
a deep reverie. Paganel made no remark, however, to the sailor, but reserved
his information for Glenarvan in the morning, and went into the tent to bed.
Next day, they were all aroused from sleep by the sudden loud barking of
dogs, Glenarvan got up forthwith. Two magnificent pointers, admirable
specimens of English hunting dogs, were bounding in front of the little wood,
into which they had retreated at the approach of the travelers, redoubling their
clamor.
“There is some station in this desert, then,” said Glenarvan, “and hunters
too, for these are regular setters.”
Paganel was just about to recount his nocturnal experiences, when two
young men appeared, mounted on horses of the most perfect breed, true
“hunters.”
The two gentlemen dressed in elegant hunting costume, stopped at the
sight of the little group camping in gipsy fashion. They looked as if they
wondered what could bring an armed party there, but when they saw the ladies
get out of the wagon, they dismounted instantly, and went toward them hat in
hand. Lord Glenarvan came to meet them, and, as a stranger, announced his
name and rank.
The gentlemen bowed, and the elder of them said, “My Lord, will not these
ladies and yourself and friends honor us by resting a little beneath our roof?”
“Mr.—,” began Glenarvan.
“Michael and Sandy Patterson are our names, proprietors of Hottam
Station. Our house is scarcely a quarter of a mile distant.”
“Gentlemen,” replied Glenarvan, “I should not like to abuse such kindlyoffered hospitality.”
“My Lord,” returned Michael Patterson, “by accepting it you will confer a
favor on poor exiles, who will be only too happy to do the honors of the
wilds.”
Glenarvan bowed in token of acquiescence.
“Sir,” said Paganel, addressing Michael Patterson, “if it is not an impudent
question, may I ask whether it was you that sung an air from the divine Mozart
last night?”
“It was, sir,” replied the stranger, “and my cousin Sandy accompanied me.”
“Well, sir,” replied Paganel, holding out his hand to the young man,
“receive the sincere compliments of a Frenchman, who is a passionate admirer
of this music.”
Michael grasped his hand cordially, and then pointing out the road to take,
set off, accompanied by the ladies and Lord Glenarvan and his friends, for the
station. The horses and the camp were left to the care of Ayrton and the
sailors.
Hottam Station was truly a magnificent establishment, kept as scrupulously
in order as an English park. Immense meadows, enclosed in gray fences,
stretched away out of sight. In these, thousands of bullocks and millions of
sheep were grazing, tended by numerous shepherds, and still more numerous
dogs. The crack of the stock-whip mingled continually with the barking of the
“collies” and the bellowing and bleating of the cattle and sheep.
Toward the east there was a boundary of myalls and gum-trees, beyond
which rose Mount Hottam, its imposing peak towering 7,500 feet high. Long
avenues of green trees were visible on all sides. Here and there was a thick
clump of “grass trees,” tall bushes ten feet high, like the dwarf palm, quite lost
in their crown of long narrow leaves. The air was balmy and odorous with the
perfume of scented laurels, whose white blossoms, now in full bloom, distilled
on the breeze the finest aromatic perfume.
To these charming groups of native trees were added transplantations from
European climates. The peach, pear, and apple trees were there, the fig, the
orange, and even the oak, to the rapturous delight of the travelers, who greeted
them with loud hurrahs! But astonished as the travelers were to find
themselves walking beneath the shadow of the trees of their own native land,
they were still more so at the sight of the birds that flew about in the branches
—the “satin bird,” with its silky plumage, and the “king-honeysuckers,” with
their plumage of gold and black velvet.
For the first time, too, they saw here the “Lyre” bird, the tail of which
resembles in form the graceful instrument of Orpheus. It flew about among the
tree ferns, and when its tail struck the branches, they were almost surprised not
to hear the harmonious strains that inspired Amphion to rebuild the walls of
Thebes. Paganel had a great desire to play on it.
However, Lord Glenarvan was not satisfied with admiring the fairy-like
wonders of this oasis, improvised in the Australian desert. He was listening to
the history of the young gentlemen. In England, in the midst of civilized
countries, the new comer acquaints his host whence he comes and whither he
is going; but here, by a refinement of delicacy, Michael and Sandy Patterson
thought it a duty to make themselves known to the strangers who were about
to receive their hospitality.
Michael and Sandy Patterson were the sons of London bankers. When they
were twenty years of age, the head of their family said, “Here are some
thousands, young men. Go to a distant colony; and start some useful
settlement there. Learn to know life by labor. If you succeed, so much the
better. If you fail, it won’t matter much. We shall not regret the money which
makes you men.”
The two young men obeyed. They chose the colony of Victoria in
Australia, as the field for sowing the paternal bank-notes, and had no reason to
repent the selection. At the end of three years the establishment was
flourishing. In Victoria, New South Wales, and Southern Australia, there are
more than three thousand stations, some belonging to squatters who rear cattle,
and others to settlers who farm the ground. Till the arrival of the two
Pattersons, the largest establishment of this sort was that of Mr. Jamieson,
which covered an area of seventy-five miles, with a frontage of about eight
miles along the Peron, one of the affluents of the Darling.
Now Hottam Station bore the palm for business and extent. The young
men were both squatters and settlers. They managed their immense property
with rare ability and uncommon energy.
The station was far removed from the chief towns in the midst of the
unfrequented districts of the Murray. It occupied a long wide space of five
leagues in extent, lying between the Buffalo Ranges and Mount Hottam. At
the two angles north of this vast quadrilateral, Mount Aberdeen rose on the
left, and the peaks of High Barven on the right. Winding, beautiful streams
were not wanting, thanks to the creeks and affluents of the Oven’s River,
which throws itself at the north into the bed of the Murray. Consequently they
were equally successful in cattle breeding and farming. Ten thousand acres of
ground, admirably cultivated, produced harvests of native productions and
exotics, and several millions of animals fattened in the fertile pastures. The
products of Hottam Station fetched the very highest price in the markets of
Castlemaine and Melbourne.
Michael and Sandy Patterson had just concluded these details of their busy
life, when their dwelling came in sight, at the extremity of the avenue of the
oaks.
It was a charming house, built of wood and brick, hidden in groves of
emerophilis. Nothing at all, however, belonging to a station was visible—
neither sheds, nor stables, nor cart-houses. All these out-buildings, a perfect
village, comprising more than twenty huts and houses, were about a quarter of
a mile off in the heart of a little valley. Electric communication was
established between this village and the master’s house, which, far removed
from all noise, seemed buried in a forest of exotic trees.
At Sandy Patterson’s bidding, a sumptuous breakfast was served in less
than a quarter of an hour. The wines and viands were of the finest quality; but
what pleased the guests most of all in the midst of these refinements of
opulence, was the joy of the young squatters in offering them this splendid
hospitality.
It was not long before they were told the history of the expedition, and had
their liveliest interest awakened for its success. They spoke hopefully to the
young Grants, and Michael said: “Harry Grant has evidently fallen into the
hands of natives, since he has not turned up at any of the settlements on the
coast. He knows his position exactly, as the document proves, and the reason
he did not reach some English colony is that he must have been taken prisoner
by the savages the moment he landed!”
“That is precisely what befell his quartermaster, Ayrton,” said John
Mangles.
“But you, gentlemen, then, have never heard the catastrophe of the
BRITANNIA, mentioned?” inquired Lady Helena.
“Never, Madam,” replied Michael.
“And what treatment, in your opinion, has Captain Grant met with among
the natives?”
“The Australians are not cruel, Madam,” replied the young squatter, “and
Miss Grant may be easy on that score. There have been many instances of the
gentleness of their nature, and some Europeans have lived a long time among
them without having the least cause to complain of their brutality.”
“King, among others, the sole survivor of the Burke expedition,” put in
Paganel.
“And not only that bold explorer,” returned Sandy, “but also an English
soldier named Buckley, who deserted at Port Philip in 1803, and who was
welcomed by the natives, and lived thirty-three years among them.”
“And more recently,” added Michael, “one of the last numbers of the
AUSTRALASIA informs us that a certain Morrilli has just been restored to his
countrymen after sixteen years of slavery. His story is exactly similar to the
captain’s, for it was at the very time of his shipwreck in the PRUVIENNE, in
1846, that he was made prisoner by the natives, and dragged away into the
interior of the continent. I therefore think you have reason to hope still.”
The young squatter’s words caused great joy to his auditors. They
completely corroborated the opinions of Paganel and Ayrton.
The conversation turned on the convicts after the ladies had left the table.
The squatters had heard of the catastrophe at Camden Bridge, but felt no
uneasiness about the escaped gang. It was not a station, with more than a
hundred men on it, that they would dare to attack. Besides, they would never
go into the deserts of the Murray, where they could find no booty, nor near the
colonies of New South Wales, where the roads were too well watched. Ayrton
had said this too.
Glenarvan could not refuse the request of his amiable hosts, to spend the
whole day at the station. It was twelve hours’ delay, but also twelve hours’
rest, and both horses and bullocks would be the better for the comfortable
quarters they would find there. This was accordingly agreed upon, and the
young squatters sketched out a programme of the day’s amusements, which
was adopted eagerly.
At noon, seven vigorous hunters were before the door. An elegant brake
was intended for the ladies, in which the coachman could exhibit his skill in
driving four-in-hand. The cavalcade set off preceded by huntsmen, and armed
with first-rate rifles, followed by a pack of pointers barking joyously as they
bounded through the bushes. For four hours the hunting party wandered
through the paths and avenues of the park, which was as large as a small
German state. The Reuiss-Schleitz, or Saxe-Coburg Gotha, would have gone
inside it comfortably. Few people were to be met in it certainly, but sheep in
abundance. As for game, there was a complete preserve awaiting the hunters.
The noisy reports of guns were soon heard on all sides. Little Robert did
wonders in company with Major McNabbs. The daring boy, in spite of his
sister’s injunctions, was always in front, and the first to fire. But John Mangles
promised to watch over him, and Mary felt less uneasy.
During this BATTUE they killed certain animals peculiar to the country,
the very names of which were unknown to Paganel; among others the
“wombat” and the “bandicoot.” The wombat is an herbivorous animal, which
burrows in the ground like a badger. It is as large as a sheep, and the flesh is
excellent.
The bandicoot is a species of marsupial animal which could outwit the
European fox, and give him lessons in pillaging poultry yards. It was a
repulsive-looking animal, a foot and a half long, but, as Paganel chanced to
kill it, of course he thought it charming.
“An adorable creature,” he called it.
But the most interesting event of the day, by far, was the kangaroo hunt.
About four o’clock, the dogs roused a troop of these curious marsupials. The
little ones retreated precipitately into the maternal pouch, and all the troop
decamped in file. Nothing could be more astonishing than the enormous
bounds of the kangaroo. The hind legs of the animal are twice as long as the
front ones, and unbend like a spring. At the head of the flying troop was a
male five feet high, a magnificent specimen of the macropus giganteus, an
“old man,” as the bushmen say.
For four or five miles the chase was vigorously pursued. The kangaroos
showed no signs of weariness, and the dogs, who had reason enough to fear
their strong paws and sharp nails, did not care to approach them. But at last,
worn out with the race, the troop stopped, and the “old man” leaned against
the trunk of a tree, ready to defend himself. One of the pointers, carried away
by excitement, went up to him. Next minute the unfortunate beast leaped into
the air, and fell down again completely ripped up.
The whole pack, indeed, would have had little chance with these powerful
marsupia. They had to dispatch the fellow with rifles. Nothing but balls could
bring down the gigantic animal.
Just at this moment, Robert was well nigh the victim of his own
imprudence. To make sure of his aim, he had approached too near the
kangaroo, and the animal leaped upon him immediately. Robert gave a loud
cry and fell. Mary Grant saw it all from the brake, and in an agony of terror,
speechless and almost unable even to see, stretched out her arms toward her
little brother. No one dared to fire, for fear of wounding the child.
But John Mangles opened his hunting knife, and at the risk of being ripped
up himself, sprang at the animal, and plunged it into his heart. The beast
dropped forward, and Robert rose unhurt. Next minute he was in his sister’s
arms.
“Thank you, Mr. John, thank you!” she said, holding out her hand to the
young captain.
“I had pledged myself for his safety,” was all John said, taking her
trembling fingers into his own.
This occurrence ended the sport. The band of marsupia had disappeared
after the death of their leader. The hunting party returned home, bringing their
game with them. It was then six o’clock. A magnificent dinner was ready.
Among other things, there was one dish that was a great success. It was
kangaroo-tail soup, prepared in the native manner.
Next morning very early, they took leave of the young squatters, with
hearty thanks and a positive promise from them of a visit to Malcolm Castle
when they should return to Europe.
Then the wagon began to move away, round the foot of Mount Hottam,
and soon the hospitable dwelling disappeared from the sight of the travelers
like some brief vision which had come and gone.
For five miles further, the horses were still treading the station lands. It
was not till nine o’clock that they had passed the last fence, and entered the
almost unknown districts of the province of Victoria.
CHAPTER XV SUSPICIOUS OCCURRENCES
An immense barrier lay across the route to the southeast. It was the
Australian Alps, a vast fortification, the fantastic curtain of which extended
1,500 miles, and pierced the clouds at the height of 4,000 feet.
The cloudy sky only allowed the heat to reach the ground through a close
veil of mist. The temperature was just bearable, but the road was toilsome
from its uneven character. The extumescences on the plain became more and
more marked. Several mounds planted with green young gum trees appeared
here and there. Further on these protuberances rising sharply, formed the first
steps of the great Alps. From this time their course was a continual ascent, as
was soon evident in the strain it made on the bullocks to drag along the
cumbrous wagon. Their yoke creaked, they breathed heavily, and the muscles
of their houghs were stretched as if they would burst. The planks of the
vehicle groaned at the unexpected jolts, which Ayrton with all his skill could
not prevent. The ladies bore their share of discomfort bravely.
John Mangles and his two sailors acted as scouts, and went about a
hundred steps in advance. They found out practical paths, or passes, indeed
they might be called, for these projections of the ground were like so many
rocks, between which the wagon had to steer carefully. It required absolute
navigation to find a safe way over the billowy region.
It was a difficult and often perilous task. Many a time Wilson’s hatchet was
obliged to open a passage through thick tangles of shrubs. The damp
argillaceous soil gave way under their feet. The route was indefinitely
prolonged owing to the insurmountable obstacles, huge blocks of granite, deep
ravines, suspected lagoons, which obliged them to make a thousand detours.
When night came they found they had only gone over half a degree. They
camped at the foot of the Alps, on the banks of the creek of Cobongra, on the
edge of a little plain, covered with little shrubs four feet high, with bright red
leaves which gladdened the eye.
“We shall have hard work to get over,” said Glenarvan, looking at the
chain of mountains, the outlines of which were fast fading away in the
deepening darkness. “The very name Alps gives plenty of room for
reflection.”
“It is not quite so big as it sounds, my dear Glenarvan. Don’t suppose you
have a whole Switzerland to traverse. In Australia there are the Grampians, the
Pyrenees, the Alps, the Blue Mountains, as in Europe and America, but in
miniature. This simply implies either that the imagination of geographers is
not infinite, or that their vocabulary of proper names is very poor.”
“Then these Australian Alps,” said Lord Glenarvan, “are—”
“Mere pocket mountains,” put in Paganel; “we shall get over them without
knowing it.”
“Speak for yourself,” said the Major. “It would certainly take a very absent
man who could cross over a chain of mountains and not know it.”
“Absent! But I am not an absent man now. I appeal to the ladies. Since
ever I set foot on the Australian continent, have I been once at fault? Can you
reproach me with a single blunder?”
“Not one. Monsieur Paganel,” said Mary Grant. “You are now the most
perfect of men.”
“Too perfect,” added Lady Helena, laughing; “your blunders suited you
admirably.”
“Didn’t they, Madam? If I have no faults now, I shall soon get like
everybody else. I hope then I shall make some outrageous mistake before long,
which will give you a good laugh. You see, unless I make mistakes, it seems to
me I fail in my vocation.”
Next day, the 9th of January, notwithstanding the assurances of the
confident geographer, it was not without great difficulty that the little troop
made its way through the Alpine pass. They were obliged to go at a venture,
and enter the depths of narrow gorges without any certainty of an outlet.
Ayrton would doubtless have found himself very much embarrassed if a little
inn, a miserable public house, had not suddenly presented itself.
“My goodness!” cried Paganel, “the landlord of this inn won’t make his
fortune in a place like this. What is the use of it here?”
“To give us the information we want about the route,” replied Glenarvan.
“Let us go in.”
Glenarvan, followed by Ayrton, entered the inn forthwith. The landlord of
the “Bush Inn,” as it was called, was a coarse man with an ill-tempered face,
who must have considered himself his principal customer for the gin, brandy
and whisky he had to sell. He seldom saw any one but the squatters and
rovers. He answered all the questions put to him in a surly tone. But his replies
sufficed to make the route clear to Ayrton, and that was all that was wanted.
Glenarvan rewarded him with a handful of silver for his trouble, and was
about to leave the tavern, when a placard against the wall arrested his
attention.
It was a police notice, and announcing the escape of the convicts from
Perth, and offering a reward for the capture of Ben Joyce of pounds 100
sterling.
“He’s a fellow that’s worth hanging, and no mistake,” said Glenarvan to
the quartermaster.
“And worth capturing still more. But what a sum to offer! He is not worth
it!”
“I don’t feel very sure of the innkeeper though, in spite of the notice,” said
Glenarvan.
“No more do I,” replied Ayrton.
They went back to the wagon, toward the point where the route to
Lucknow stopped. A narrow path wound away from this which led across the
chain in a slanting direction. They had commenced the ascent.
It was hard work. More than once both the ladies and gentlemen had to get
down and walk. They were obliged to help to push round the wheels of the
heavy vehicle, and to support it frequently in dangerous declivities, to
unharness the bullocks when the team could not go well round sharp turnings,
prop up the wagon when it threatened to roll back, and more than once Ayrton
had to reinforce his bullocks by harnessing the horses, although they were
tired out already with dragging themselves along.
Whether it was this prolonged fatigue, or from some other cause
altogether, was not known, but one of the horses sank suddenly, without the
slightest symptom of illness. It was Mulrady’s horse that fell, and on
attempting to pull it up, the animal was found to be dead. Ayrton examined it
immediately, but was quite at a loss to account for the disaster.
“The beast must have broken some blood vessels,” said Glenarvan.
“Evidently,” replied Ayrton.
“Take my horse, Mulrady,” added Glenarvan. “I will join Lady Helena in
the wagon.”
Mulrady obeyed, and the little party continued their fatiguing ascent,
leaving the carcass of the dead animal to the ravens.
The Australian Alps are of no great thickness, and the base is not more
than eight miles wide. Consequently if the pass chosen by Ayrton came out on
the eastern side, they might hope to get over the high barrier within forty-eight
hours more. The difficulty of the route would then be surmounted, and they
would only have to get to the sea.
During the 18th the travelers reached the top-most point of the pass, about
2,000 feet high. They found themselves on an open plateau, with nothing to
intercept the view. Toward the north the quiet waters of Lake Omco, all alive
with aquatic birds, and beyond this lay the vast plains of the Murray. To the
south were the wide spreading plains of Gippsland, with its abundant goldfields and tall forests. There nature was still mistress of the products and
water, and great trees where the woodman’s ax was as yet unknown, and the
squatters, then five in number, could not struggle against her. It seemed as if
this chain of the Alps separated two different countries, one of which had
retained its primitive wildness. The sun went down, and a few solitary rays
piercing the rosy clouds, lighted up the Murray district, leaving Gippsland in
deep shadow, as if night had suddenly fallen on the whole region. The contrast
was presented very vividly to the spectators placed between these two
countries so divided, and some emotion filled the minds of the travelers, as
they contemplated the almost unknown district they were about to traverse
right to the frontiers of Victoria.
They camped on the plateau that night, and next day the descent
commenced. It was tolerably rapid. A hailstorm of extreme violence assailed
the travelers, and obliged them to seek a shelter among the rocks. It was not
hail-stones, but regular lumps of ice, as large as one’s hand, which fell from
the stormy clouds. A waterspout could not have come down with more
violence, and sundry big bruises warned Paganel and Robert to retreat. The
wagon was riddled in several places, and few coverings would have held out
against those sharp icicles, some of which had fastened themselves into the
trunks of the trees. It was impossible to go on till this tremendous shower was
over, unless the travelers wished to be stoned. It lasted about an hour, and then
the march commenced anew over slanting rocks still slippery after the hail.
Toward evening the wagon, very much shaken and disjointed in several
parts, but still standing firm on its wooden disks, came down the last slopes of
the Alps, among great isolated pines. The passage ended in the plains of
Gippsland. The chain of the Alps was safely passed, and the usual
arrangements were made for the nightly encampment.
On the 21st, at daybreak, the journey was resumed with an ardor which
never relaxed. Everyone was eager to reach the goal—that is to say the Pacific
Ocean—at that part where the wreck of the BRITANNIA had occurred.
Nothing could be done in the lonely wilds of Gippsland, and Ayrton urged
Lord Glenarvan to send orders at once for the DUNCAN to repair to the coast,
in order to have at hand all means of research. He thought it would certainly
be advisable to take advantage of the Lucknow route to Melbourne. If they
waited it would be difficult to find any way of direct communication with the
capital.
This advice seemed good, and Paganel recommended that they should act
upon it. He also thought that the presence of the yacht would be very useful,
and he added, that if the Lucknow road was once passed, it would be
impossible to communicate with Melbourne.
Glenarvan was undecided what to do, and perhaps he would have yielded
to Ayrton’s arguments, if the Major had not combated this decision vigorously.
He maintained that the presence of Ayrton was necessary to the expedition,
that he would know the country about the coast, and that if any chance should
put them on the track of Harry Grant, the quartermaster would be better able to
follow it up than any one else, and, finally, that he alone could point out the
exact spot where the shipwreck occurred.
McNabbs voted therefore for the continuation of the voyage, without
making the least change in their programme. John Mangles was of the same
opinion. The young captain said even that orders would reach the DUNCAN
more easily from Twofold Bay, than if a message was sent two hundred miles
over a wild country.
His counsel prevailed. It was decided that they should wait till they came
to Twofold Bay. The Major watched Ayrton narrowly, and noticed his
disappointed look. But he said nothing, keeping his observations, as usual, to
himself.
The plains which lay at the foot of the Australian Alps were level, but
slightly inclined toward the east. Great clumps of mimosas and eucalyptus,
and various odorous gum-trees, broke the uniform monotony here and there.
The gastrolobium grandiflorum covered the ground, with its bushes covered
with gay flowers. Several unimportant creeks, mere streams full of little
rushes, and half covered up with orchids, often interrupted the route. They had
to ford these. Flocks of bustards and emus fled at the approach of the travelers.
Below the shrubs, kangaroos were leaping and springing like dancing jacks.
But the hunters of the party were not thinking much of the sport, and the
horses little needed any additional fatigue.
Moreover, a sultry heat oppressed the plain. The atmosphere was
completely saturated with electricity, and its influence was felt by men and
beasts. They just dragged themselves along, and cared for nothing else. The
silence was only interrupted by the cries of Ayrton urging on his burdened
team.
From noon to two o’clock they went through a curious forest of ferns,
which would have excited the admiration of less weary travelers. These plants
in full flower measured thirty feet in height. Horses and riders passed easily
beneath their drooping leaves, and sometimes the spurs would clash against
the woody stems. Beneath these immovable parasols there was a refreshing
coolness which every one appreciated. Jacques Paganel, always
demonstrative, gave such deep sighs of satisfaction that the paroquets and
cockatoos flew out in alarm, making a deafening chorus of noisy chatter.
The geographer was going on with his sighs and jubilations with the
utmost coolness, when his companions suddenly saw him reel forward, and he
and his horse fell down in a lump. Was it giddiness, or worse still, suffocation,
caused by the high temperature? They ran to him, exclaiming: “Paganel!
Paganel! what is the matter?”
“Just this. I have no horse, now!” he replied, disengaging his feet from the
stirrups.
“What! your horse?”
“Dead like Mulrady’s, as if a thunderbolt had struck him.”
Glenarvan, John Mangles, and Wilson examined the animal; and found
Paganel was right. His horse had been suddenly struck dead.
“That is strange,” said John.
“Very strange, truly,” muttered the Major.
Glenarvan was greatly disturbed by this fresh accident. He could not get a
fresh horse in the desert, and if an epidemic was going to seize their steeds,
they would be seriously embarrassed how to proceed.
Before the close of the day, it seemed as if the word epidemic was really
going to be justified. A third horse, Wilson’s, fell dead, and what was, perhaps
equally disastrous, one of the bullocks also. The means of traction and
transport were now reduced to three bullocks and four horses.
The situation became grave. The unmounted horsemen might walk, of
course, as many squatters had done already; but if they abandoned the wagon,
what would the ladies do? Could they go over the one hundred and twenty
miles which lay between them and Twofold Bay? John Mangles and Lord
Glenarvan examined the surviving horses with great uneasiness, but there was
not the slightest symptom of illness or feebleness in them. The animals were in
perfect health, and bravely bearing the fatigues of the voyage. This somewhat
reassured Glenarvan, and made him hope the malady would strike no more
victims. Ayrton agreed with him, but was unable to find the least solution of
the mystery.
They went on again, the wagon serving, from time to time, as a house of
rest for the pedestrians. In the evening, after a march of only ten miles, the
signal to halt was given, and the tent pitched. The night passed without
inconvenience beneath a vast mass of bushy ferns, under which enormous
bats, properly called flying foxes, were flapping about.
The next day’s journey was good; there were no new calamities. The health
of the expedition remained satisfactory; horses and cattle did their task
cheerily. Lady Helena’s drawing-room was very lively, thanks to the number
of visitors. M. Olbinett busied himself in passing round refreshments which
were very acceptable in such hot weather. Half a barrel of Scotch ale was sent
in bodily. Barclay and Co. was declared to be the greatest man in Great
Britain, even above Wellington, who could never have manufactured such
good beer. This was a Scotch estimate. Jacques Paganel drank largely, and
discoursed still more de omni re scibili.
A day so well commenced seemed as if it could not but end well; they had
gone fifteen good miles, and managed to get over a pretty hilly district where
the soil was reddish. There was every reason to hope they might camp that
same night on the banks of the Snowy River, an important river which throws
itself into the Pacific, south of Victoria.
Already the wheels of the wagon were making deep ruts on the wide
plains, covered with blackish alluvium, as it passed on between tufts of
luxuriant grass and fresh fields of gastrolobium. As evening came on, a white
mist on the horizon marked the course of the Snowy River. Several additional
miles were got over, and a forest of tall trees came in sight at a bend of the
road, behind a gentle eminence. Ayrton turned his team a little toward the
great trunks, lost in shadow, and he had got to the skirts of the wood, about
half-a-mile from the river, when the wagon suddenly sank up to the middle of
the wheels.
“Stop!” he called out to the horsemen following him.
“What is wrong?” inquired Glenarvan.
“We have stuck in the mud,” replied Ayrton.
He tried to stimulate the bullocks to a fresh effort by voice and goad, but
the animals were buried half-way up their legs, and could not stir.
“Let us camp here,” suggested John Mangles.
“It would certainly be the best place,” said Ayrton. “We shall see by
daylight to-morrow how to get ourselves out.”
Glenarvan acted on their advice, and came to a halt. Night came on rapidly
after a brief twilight, but the heat did not withdraw with the light. Stifling
vapors filled the air, and occasionally bright flashes of lightning, the
reflections of a distant storm, lighted up the sky with a fiery glare.
Arrangements were made for the night immediately. They did the best they
could with the sunk wagon, and the tent was pitched beneath the shelter of the
great trees; and if the rain did not come, they had not much to complain about.
Ayrton succeeded, though with some difficulty, in extricating the three
bullocks. These courageous beasts were engulfed up to their flanks. The
quartermaster turned them out with the four horses, and allowed no one but
himself to see after their pasturage. He always executed his task wisely, and
this evening Glenarvan noticed he redoubled his care, for which he took
occasion to thank him, the preservation of the team being of supreme
importance.
Meantime, the travelers were dispatching a hasty supper. Fatigue and heat
destroy appetite, and sleep was needed more than food. Lady Helena and Miss
Grant speedily bade the company good-night, and retired. Their companions
soon stretched themselves under the tent or outside under the trees, which is
no great hardship in this salubrious climate.
Gradually they all fell into a heavy sleep. The darkness deepened owing to
a thick current of clouds which overspread the sky. There was not a breath of
wind. The silence of night was only interrupted by the cries of the “morepork”
in the minor key, like the mournful cuckoos of Europe.
Towards eleven o’clock, after a wretched, heavy, unrefreshing sleep, the
Major woke. His half-closed eyes were struck with a faint light running among
the great trees. It looked like a white sheet, and glittered like a lake, and
McNabbs thought at first it was the commencement of a fire.
He started up, and went toward the wood; but what was his surprise to
perceive a purely natural phenomenon! Before him lay an immense bed of
mushrooms, which emitted a phosphorescent light. The luminous spores of the
cryptograms shone in the darkness with intensity.
The Major, who had no selfishness about him, was going to waken
Paganel, that he might see this phenomenon with his own eyes, when
something occurred which arrested him. This phosphorescent light illumined
the distance half a mile, and McNabbs fancied he saw a shadow pass across
the edge of it. Were his eyes deceiving him? Was it some hallucination?
McNabbs lay down on the ground, and, after a close scrutiny, he could
distinctly see several men stooping down and lifting themselves up alternately,
as if they were looking on the ground for recent marks.
The Major resolved to find out what these fellows were about, and without
the least hesitation or so much as arousing his companions, crept along, lying
flat on the ground, like a savage on the prairies, completely hidden among the
long grass.
CHAPTER XVI A STARTLING DISCOVERY
It was a frightful night. At two A. M. the rain began to fall in torrents from
the stormy clouds, and continued till daybreak. The tent became an insufficient
shelter. Glenarvan and his companions took refuge in the wagon; they did not
sleep, but talked of one thing and another. The Major alone, whose brief
absence had not been noticed, contented himself with being a silent listener.
There was reason to fear that if the storm lasted longer the Snowy River would
overflow its banks, which would be a very unlucky thing for the wagon, stuck
fast as it was already in the soft ground. Mulrady, Ayrton and Mangles went
several times to ascertain the height of the water, and came back dripping from
head to foot.
At last day appeared; the rain ceased, but sunlight could not break through
the thick clouds. Large patches of yellowish water—muddy, dirty ponds
indeed they were—covered the ground. A hot steam rose from the soaking
earth, and saturated the atmosphere with unhealthy humidity.
Glenarvan’s first concern was the wagon; this was the main thing in his
eyes. They examined the ponderous vehicle, and found it sunk in the mud in a
deep hollow in the stiff clay. The forepart had disappeared completely, and the
hind part up to the axle. It would be a hard job to get the heavy conveyance
out, and would need the united strength of men, bullocks, and horses.
“At any rate, we must make haste,” said John Mangles. “If the clay dries, it
will make our task still more difficult.”
“Let us be quick, then,” replied Ayrton.
Glenarvan, his two sailors, John Mangles, and Ayrton went off at once into
the wood, where the animals had passed the night. It was a gloomy-looking
forest of tall gum-trees; nothing but dead trees, with wide spaces between,
which had been barked for ages, or rather skinned like the cork-oak at harvest
time. A miserable network of bare branches was seen above two hundred feet
high in the air. Not a bird built its nest in these aerial skeletons; not a leaf
trembled on the dry branches, which rattled together like bones. To what
cataclysm is this phenomenon to be attributed, so frequent in Australia, entire
forests struck dead by some epidemic; no one knows; neither the oldest
natives, nor their ancestors who have lain long buried in the groves of the
dead, have ever seen them green.
Glenarvan as he went along kept his eye fixed on the gray sky, on which
the smallest branch of the gum-trees was sharply defined. Ayrton was
astonished not to discover the horses and bullocks where he had left them the
preceding night. They could not have wandered far with the hobbles on their
legs.
They looked over the wood, but saw no signs of them, and Ayrton returned
to the banks of the river, where magnificent mimosas were growing. He gave a
cry well known to his team, but there was no reply. The quartermaster seemed
uneasy, and his companions looked at him with disappointed faces. An hour
had passed in vain endeavors, and Glenarvan was about to go back to the
wagon, when a neigh struck on his ear, and immediately after a bellow.
“They are there!” cried John Mangles, slipping between the tall branches
of gastrolobium, which grew high enough to hide a whole flock. Glenarvan,
Mulrady, and Ayrton darted after him, and speedily shared his stupefaction at
the spectacle which met their gaze.
Two bullocks and three horses lay stretched on the ground, struck down
like the rest. Their bodies were already cold, and a flock of half-starved
looking ravens croaking among the mimosas were watching the unexpected
prey. Glenarvan and his party gazed at each other and Wilson could not keep
back the oath that rose to his lips.
“What do you mean, Wilson?” said Glenarvan, with difficulty controlling
himself. “Ayrton, bring away the bullock and the horse we have left; they will
have to serve us now.”
“If the wagon were not sunk in the mud,” said John Mangles, “these two
animals, by making short journeys, would be able to take us to the coast; so
we must get the vehicle out, cost what it may.”
“We will try, John,” replied Glenarvan. “Let us go back now, or they will
be uneasy at our long absence.”
Ayrton removed the hobbles from the bullock and Mulrady from the horse,
and they began to return to the encampment, following the winding margin of
the river. In half an hour they rejoined Paganel, and McNabbs, and the ladies,
and told them of this fresh disaster.
“Upon my honor, Ayrton,” the Major could not help saying, “it is a pity
that you hadn’t had the shoeing of all our beasts when we forded the
Wimerra.”
“Why, sir?” asked Ayrton.
“Because out of all our horses only the one your blacksmith had in his
hands has escaped the common fate.”
“That’s true,” said John Mangles. “It’s strange it happens so.”
“A mere chance, and nothing more,” replied the quartermaster, looking
firmly at the Major.
Major McNabbs bit his lips as if to keep back something he was about to
say. Glenarvan and the rest waited for him to speak out his thoughts, but the
Major was silent, and went up to the wagon, which Ayrton was examining.
“What was he going to say. Mangles?” asked Glenarvan.
“I don’t know,” replied the young captain; “but the Major is not at all a
man to speak without reason.”
“No, John,” said Lady Helena. “McNabbs must have suspicions about
Ayrton.”
“Suspicions!” exclaimed Paganel, shrugging his shoulders.
“And what can they be?” asked Glenarvan. “Does he suppose him capable
of having killed our horses and bullocks? And for what purpose? Is not
Ayrton’s interest identical with our own?”
“You are right, dear Edward,” said Lady Helena! “and what is more, the
quartermaster has given us incontestable proofs of his devotion ever since the
commencement of the journey.”
“Certainly he has,” replied Mangles; “but still, what could the Major
mean? I wish he would speak his mind plainly out.”
“Does he suppose him acting in concert with the convicts?” asked Paganel,
imprudently.
“What convicts?” said Miss Grant.
“Monsieur Paganel is making a mistake,” replied John Mangles, instantly.
“He knows very well there are no convicts in the province of Victoria.”
“Ah, that is true,” returned Paganel, trying to get out of his unlucky speech.
“Whatever had I got in my head? Convicts! who ever heard of convicts being
in Australia? Besides, they would scarcely have disembarked before they
would turn into good, honest men. The climate, you know, Miss Mary, the
regenerative climate—”
Here the poor SAVANT stuck fast, unable to get further, like the wagon in
the mud. Lady Helena looked at him in surprise, which quite deprived him of
his remaining sang-froid; but seeing his embarrassment, she took Mary away
to the side of the tent, where M. Olbinett was laying out an elaborate
breakfast.
“I deserve to be transported myself,” said Paganel, woefully.
“I think so,” said Glenarvan.
And after this grave reply, which completely overwhelmed the worthy
geographer, Glenarvan and John Mangles went toward the wagon.
They found Ayrton and the two sailors doing their best to get it out of the
deep ruts, and the bullock and horse, yoked together, were straining every
muscle. Wilson and Mulrady were pushing the wheels, and the quartermaster
urging on the team with voice and goad; but the heavy vehicle did not stir, the
clay, already dry, held it as firmly as if sealed by some hydraulic cement.
John Mangles had the clay watered to loosen it, but it was of no use. After
renewed vigorous efforts, men and animals stopped. Unless the vehicle was
taken to pieces, it would be impossible to extricate it from the mud; but they
had no tools for the purpose, and could not attempt such a task.
However, Ayrton, who was for conquering this obstacle at all costs, was
about to commence afresh, when Glenarvan stopped him by saying: “Enough,
Ayrton, enough. We must husband the strength of our remaining horse and
bullock. If we are obliged to continue our journey on foot, the one animal can
carry the ladies and the other the provisions. They may thus still be of great
service to us.”
“Very well, my Lord,” replied the quartermaster, un-yoking the exhausted
beasts.
“Now, friends,” added Glenarvan, “let us return to the encampment and
deliberately examine our situation, and determine on our course of action.”
After a tolerably good breakfast to make up for their bad night, the
discussion was opened, and every one of the party was asked to give his
opinion. The first point was to ascertain their exact position, and this was
referred to Paganel, who informed them, with his customary rigorous
accuracy, that the expedition had been stopped on the 37th parallel, in
longitude 147 degrees 53 minutes, on the banks of the Snowy River.
“What is the exact longitude of Twofold Bay?” asked Glenarvan.
“One hundred and fifty degrees,” replied Paganel; “two degrees seven
minutes distant from this, and that is equal to seventy-five miles.”
“And Melbourne is?”
“Two hundred miles off at least.”
“Very good. Our position being then settled, what is best to do?”
The response was unanimous to get to the coast without delay. Lady
Helena and Mary Grant undertook to go five miles a day. The courageous
ladies did not shrink, if necessary, from walking the whole distance between
the Snowy River and Twofold Bay.
“You are a brave traveling companion, dear Helena,” said Lord Glenarvan.
“But are we sure of finding at the bay all we want when we get there?”
“Without the least doubt,” replied Paganel. “Eden is a municipality which
already numbers many years in existence; its port must have frequent
communication with Melbourne. I suppose even at Delegete, on the Victoria
frontier, thirty-five miles from here, we might revictual our expedition, and
find fresh means of transport.”
“And the DUNCAN?” asked Ayrton. “Don’t you think it advisable to send
for her to come to the bay?”
“What do you think, John?” said Glenarvan.
“I don’t think your lordship should be in any hurry about it,” replied the
young captain, after brief reflection. “There will be time enough to give orders
to Tom Austin, and summon him to the coast.”
“That’s quite certain,” added Paganel.
“You see,” said John, “in four or five days we shall reach Eden.”
“Four or five days!” repeated Ayrton, shaking his head; “say fifteen or
twenty, Captain, if you don’t want to repent your mistake when it is too late.”
“Fifteen or twenty days to go seventy-five miles?” cried Glenarvan.
“At the least, my Lord. You are going to traverse the most difficult portion
of Victoria, a desert, where everything is wanting, the squatters say; plains
covered with scrub, where is no beaten track and no stations. You will have to
walk hatchet or torch in hand, and, believe me, that’s not quick work.”
Ayrton had spoken in a firm tone, and Paganel, at whom all the others
looked inquiringly, nodded his head in token of his agreement in opinion with
the quartermaster.
But John Mangles said, “Well, admitting these difficulties, in fifteen days
at most your Lordship can send orders to the DUNCAN.”
“I have to add,” said Ayrton, “that the principal difficulties are not the
obstacles in the road, but the Snowy River has to be crossed, and most
probably we must wait till the water goes down.”
“Wait!” cried John. “Is there no ford?”
“I think not,” replied Ayrton. “This morning I was looking for some
practical crossing, but could not find any. It is unusual to meet with such a
tumultuous river at this time of the year, and it is a fatality against which I am
powerless.”
“Is this Snowy River wide?” asked Lady Helena.
“Wide and deep, Madam,” replied Ayrton; “a mile wide, with an
impetuous current. A good swimmer could not go over without danger.”
“Let us build a boat then,” said Robert, who never stuck at anything. “We
have only to cut down a tree and hollow it out, and get in and be off.”
“He’s going ahead, this boy of Captain Grant’s!” said Paganel.
“And he’s right,” returned John Mangles. “We shall be forced to come to
that, and I think it is useless to waste our time in idle discussion.”
“What do you think of it, Ayrton?” asked Glenarvan seriously.
“I think, my Lord, that a month hence, unless some help arrives, we shall
find ourselves still on the banks of the Snowy.”
“Well, then, have you any better plan to propose?” said John Mangles,
somewhat impatiently.
“Yes, that the DUNCAN should leave Melbourne, and go to the east
coast.”
“Oh, always the same story! And how could her presence at the bay
facilitate our means of getting there?”
Ayrton waited an instant before answering, and then said, rather evasively:
“I have no wish to obtrude my opinions. What I do is for our common good,
and I am ready to start the moment his honor gives the signal.” And he crossed
his arms and was silent.
“That is no reply, Ayrton,” said Glenarvan. “Tell us your plan, and we will
discuss it. What is it you propose?”
Ayrton replied in a calm tone of assurance: “I propose that we should not
venture beyond the Snowy in our present condition. It is here we must wait till
help comes, and this help can only come from the DUNCAN. Let us camp
here, where we have provisions, and let one of us take your orders to Tom
Austin to go on to Twofold Bay.”
This unexpected proposition was greeted with astonishment, and by John
Mangles with openly-expressed opposition.
“Meantime,” continued Ayrton, “either the river will get lower, and allow
us to ford it, or we shall have time to make a canoe. This is the plan I submit
for your Lordship’s approval.”
“Well, Ayrton,” replied Glenarvan, “your plan is worthy of serious
consideration. The worst thing about it is the delay it would cause; but it
would save us great fatigue, and perhaps danger. What do you think of it,
friends?”
“Speak your mind, McNabbs,” said Lady Helena. “Since the beginning of
the discussion you have been only a listener, and very sparing of your words.”
“Since you ask my advice,” said the Major, “I will give it you frankly. I
think Ayrton has spoken wisely and well, and I side with him.”
Such a reply was hardly looked for, as hitherto the Major had been strongly
opposed to Ayrton’s project. Ayrton himself was surprised, and gave a hasty
glance at the Major. However, Paganel, Lady Helena, and the sailors were all
of the same way of thinking; and since McNabbs had come over to his
opinion, Glenarvan decided that the quartermaster’s plan should be adopted in
principle.
“And now, John,” he added, “don’t you think yourself it would be prudent
to encamp here, on the banks of the river Snowy, till we can get some means
of conveyance.”
“Yes,” replied John Mangles, “if our messenger can get across the Snowy
when we cannot.”
All eyes were turned on the quartermaster, who said, with the air of a man
who knew what he was about: “The messenger will not cross the river.”
“Indeed!” said John Mangles.
“He will simply go back to the Lucknow Road which leads straight to
Melbourne.”
“Go two hundred and fifty miles on foot!” cried the young Captain.
“On horseback,” replied Ayrton. “There is one horse sound enough at
present. It will only be an affair of four days. Allow the DUNCAN two days
more to get to the bay and twenty hours to get back to the camp, and in a week
the messenger can be back with the entire crew of the vessel.”
The Major nodded approvingly as Ayrton spoke, to the profound
astonishment of John Mangles; but as every one was in favor of the plan all
there was to do was to carry it out as quickly as possible.
“Now, then, friends,” said Glenarvan, “we must settle who is to be our
messenger. It will be a fatiguing, perilous mission. I would not conceal the fact
from you. Who is disposed, then, to sacrifice himself for his companions and
carry our instructions to Melbourne?”
Wilson and Mulrady, and also Paganel, John Mangles and Robert instantly
offered their services. John particularly insisted that he should be intrusted
with the business; but Ayrton, who had been silent till that moment, now said:
“With your Honor’s permission I will go myself. I am accustomed to all the
country round. Many a time I have been across worse parts. I can go through
where another would stick. I ask then, for the good of all, that I may be sent to
Melbourne. A word from you will accredit me with your chief officer, and in
six days I guarantee the DUNCAN shall be in Twofold Bay.”
“That’s well spoken,” replied Glenarvan. “You are a clever, daring fellow,
and you will succeed.”
It was quite evident the quartermaster was the fittest man for the mission.
All the rest withdrew from the competition. John Mangles made this one last
objection, that the presence of Ayrton was necessary to discover traces of the
BRITANNIA or Harry Grant. But the Major justly observed that the
expedition would remain on the banks of the Snowy till the return of Ayrton,
that they had no idea of resuming their search without him, and that
consequently his absence would not in the least prejudice the Captain’s
interests.
“Well, go, Ayrton,” said Glenarvan. “Be as quick as you can, and come
back by Eden to our camp.”
A gleam of satisfaction shot across the quartermaster’s face. He turned
away his head, but not before John Mangles caught the look and instinctively
felt his old distrust of Ayrton revive.
The quartermaster made immediate preparations for departure, assisted by
the two sailors, one of whom saw to the horse and the other to the provisions.
Glenarvan, meantime, wrote his letter for Tom Austin. He ordered his chief
officer to repair without delay to Twofold Bay. He introduced the
quartermaster to him as a man worthy of all confidence. On arriving at the
coast, Tom was to dispatch a detachment of sailors from the yacht under his
orders.
Glenarvan was just at this part of his letter, when McNabbs, who was
following him with his eyes, asked him in a singular tone, how he wrote
Ayrton’s name.
“Why, as it is pronounced, of course,” replied Glenarvan.
“It is a mistake,” replied the Major quietly. “He pronounces it AYRTON,
but he writes it Ben Joyce!”
CHAPTER XVII THE PLOT UNVEILED
The revelation of Tom Ayrton’s name was like a clap of thunder. Ayrton
had started up quickly and grasped his revolver. A report was heard, and
Glenarvan fell wounded by a ball. Gunshots resounded at the same time
outside.
John Mangles and the sailors, after their first surprise, would have seized
Ben Joyce; but the bold convict had already disappeared and rejoined his gang
scattered among the gum-trees.
The tent was no shelter against the balls. It was necessary to beat a retreat.
Glenarvan was slightly wounded, but could stand up.
“To the wagon—to the wagon!” cried John Mangles, dragging Lady
Helena and Mary Grant along, who were soon in safety behind the thick
curtains.
John and the Major, and Paganel and the sailors seized their carbines in
readiness to repulse the convicts. Glenarvan and Robert went in beside the
ladies, while Olbinett rushed to the common defense.
These events occurred with the rapidity of lightning. John Mangles
watched the skirts of the wood attentively. The reports had ceased suddenly on
the arrival of Ben Joyce; profound silence had succeeded the noisy fusillade. A
few wreaths of white smoke were still curling over the tops of the gum trees.
The tall tufts of gastrolobium were motionless. All signs of attack had
disappeared.
The Major and John Mangles examined the wood closely as far as the great
trees; the place was abandoned. Numerous footmarks were there and several
half-burned caps were lying smoking on the ground. The Major, like a prudent
man, extinguished these carefully, for a spark would be enough to kindle a
tremendous conflagration in this forest of dry trees.
“The convicts have disappeared!” said John Mangles.
“Yes,” replied the Major; “and the disappearance of them makes me
uneasy. I prefer seeing them face to face. Better to meet a tiger on the plain
than a serpent in the grass. Let us beat the bushes all round the wagon.”
The Major and John hunted all round the country, but there was not a
convict to be seen from the edge of the wood right down to the river. Ben
Joyce and his gang seemed to have flown away like a flock of marauding
birds. It was too sudden a disappearance to let the travelers feel perfectly safe;
consequently they resolved to keep a sharp lookout. The wagon, a regular
fortress buried in mud, was made the center of the camp, and two men
mounted guard round it, who were relieved hour by hour.
The first care of Lady Helena and Mary was to dress Glenarvan’s wound.
Lady Helena rushed toward him in terror, as he fell down struck by Ben
Joyce’s ball. Controlling her agony, the courageous woman helped her
husband into the wagon. Then his shoulder was bared, and the Major found,
on examination, that the ball had only gone into the flesh, and there was no
internal lesion. Neither bone nor muscle appeared to be injured. The wound
bled profusely, but Glenarvan could use his fingers and forearm; and
consequently there was no occasion for any uneasiness about the issue. As
soon as his shoulder was dressed, he would not allow any more fuss to be
made about himself, but at once entered on the business in hand.
All the party, except Mulrady and Wilson, who were on guard, were
brought into the wagon, and the Major was asked to explain how this
DENOUEMENT had come about.
Before commencing his recital, he told Lady Helena about the escape of
the convicts at Perth, and their appearance in Victoria; as also their complicity
in the railway catastrophe. He handed her the Australian and New Zealand
Gazette they had bought in Seymour, and added that a reward had been offered
by the police for the apprehension of Ben Joyce, a redoubtable bandit, who
had become a noted character during the last eighteen months, for doing deeds
of villainy and crime.
But how had McNabbs found out that Ayrton and Ben Joyce were one and
the same individual? This was the mystery to be unraveled, and the Major
soon explained it.
Ever since their first meeting, McNabbs had felt an instinctive distrust of
the quartermaster. Two or three insignificant facts, a hasty glance exchanged
between him and the blacksmith at the Wimerra River, his unwillingness to
cross towns and villages, his persistence about getting the DUNCAN
summoned to the coast, the strange death of the animals entrusted to his care,
and, lastly, a want of frankness in all his behavior—all these details combined
had awakened the Major’s suspicions.
However, he could not have brought any direct accusation against him till
the events of the preceding evening had occurred. He then told of his
experience.
McNabbs, slipping between the tall shrubs, got within reach of the
suspicious shadows he had noticed about half a mile away from the
encampment. The phosphorescent furze emitted a faint light, by which he
could discern three men examining marks on the ground, and one of the three
was the blacksmith of Black Point.
“‘It is them!’said one of the men. ‘Yes,’ replied another, ‘there is the trefoil
on the mark of the horseshoe. It has been like that since the Wimerra.’ ‘All the
horses are dead.’ ‘The poison is not far off.’ ‘There is enough to kill a regiment
of cavalry.’ ‘A useful plant this gastrolobium.’
“I heard them say this to each other, and then they were quite silent; but I
did not know enough yet, so I followed them. Soon the conversation began
again. ‘He is a clever fellow, this Ben Joyce,’ said the blacksmith. ‘A capital
quartermaster, with his invention of shipwreck.’ ‘If his project succeeds, it will
be a stroke of fortune.’ ‘He is a very devil, is this Ayrton.’ ‘Call him Ben
Joyce, for he has well earned his name.’ And then the scoundrels left the
forest.
“I had all the information I wanted now, and came back to the camp quite
convinced, begging Paganel’s pardon, that Australia does not reform
criminals.”
This was all the Major’s story, and his companions sat silently thinking
over it.
“Then Ayrton has dragged us here,” said Glenarvan, pale with anger, “on
purpose to rob and assassinate us.”
“For nothing else,” replied the Major; “and ever since we left the Wimerra,
his gang has been on our track and spying on us, waiting for a favorable
opportunity.”
“Yes.”
“Then the wretch was never one of the sailors on the BRITANNIA; he had
stolen the name of Ayrton and the shipping papers.”
They were all looking at McNabbs for an answer, for he must have put the
question to himself already.
“There is no great certainty about the matter,” he replied, in his usual calm
voice; “but in my opinion the man’s name is really Ayrton. Ben Joyce is his
nom de guerre. It is an incontestible fact that he knew Harry Grant, and also
that he was quartermaster on the BRITANNIA. These facts were proved by the
minute details given us by Ayrton, and are corroborated by the conversation
between the convicts, which I repeated to you. We need not lose ourselves in
vain conjectures, but consider it as certain that Ben Joyce is Ayrton, and that
Ayrton is Ben Joyce; that is to say, one of the crew of the BRITANNIA has
turned leader of the convict gang.”
The explanations of McNabbs were accepted without discussion.
“Now, then,” said Glenarvan, “will you tell us how and why Harry Grant’s
quartermaster comes to be in Australia?”
“How, I don’t know,” replied McNabbs; “and the police declare they are as
ignorant on the subject as myself. Why, it is impossible to say; that is a
mystery which the future may explain.”
“The police are not even aware of Ayrton’s identity with Ben Joyce,” said
John Mangles.
“You are right, John,” replied the Major, “and this circumstance would
throw light on their search.”
“Then, I suppose,” said Lady Helena, “the wicked wretch had got work on
Paddy O’Moore’s farm with a criminal intent?”
“There is not the least doubt of it. He was planning some evil design
against the Irishman, when a better chance presented itself. Chance led us into
his presence. He heard Paganel’s story and all about the shipwreck, and the
audacious fellow determined to act his part immediately. The expedition was
decided on. At the Wimerra he found means of communicating with one of his
gang, the blacksmith of Black Point, and left traces of our journey which
might be easily recognized. The gang followed us. A poisonous plant enabled
them gradually to kill our bullocks and horses. At the right moment he sunk us
in the marshes of the Snowy, and gave us into the hands of his gang.”
Such was the history of Ben Joyce. The Major had shown him up in his
character—a bold and formidable criminal. His manifestly evil designs called
for the utmost vigilance on the part of Glenarvan. Happily the unmasked
bandit was less to be feared than the traitor.
But one serious consequence must come out of this revelation; no one had
thought of it yet except Mary Grant. John Mangles was the first to notice her
pale, despairing face; he understood what was passing in her mind at a glance.
“Miss Mary! Miss Mary!” he cried; “you are crying!”
“Crying, my child!” said Lady Helena.
“My father, madam, my father!” replied the poor girl.
She could say no more, but the truth flashed on every mind. They all knew
the cause of her grief, and why tears fell from her eyes and her father’s name
came to her lips.
The discovery of Ayrton’s treachery had destroyed all hope; the convict
had invented a shipwreck to entrap Glenarvan. In the conversation overheard
by McNabbs, the convicts had plainly said that the BRITANNIA had never
been wrecked on the rocks in Twofold Bay. Harry Grant had never set foot on
the Australian continent!
A second time they had been sent on the wrong track by an erroneous
interpretation of the document. Gloomy silence fell on the whole party at the
sight of the children’s sorrow, and no one could find a cheering word to say.
Robert was crying in his sister’s arms. Paganel muttered in a tone of vexation:
“That unlucky document! It may boast of having half-crazed a dozen peoples’
wits!” The worthy geographer was in such a rage with himself, that he struck
his forehead as if he would smash it in.
Glenarvan went out to Mulrady and Wilson, who were keeping watch.
Profound silence reigned over the plain between the wood and the river. Ben
Joyce and his band must be at considerable distance, for the atmosphere was in
such a state of complete torpor that the slightest sound would have been heard.
It was evident, from the flocks of birds on the lower branches of the trees, and
the kangaroos feeding quietly on the young shoots, and a couple of emus
whose confiding heads passed between the great clumps of bushes, that those
peaceful solitudes were untroubled by the presence of human beings.
“You have neither seen nor heard anything for the last hour?” said
Glenarvan to the two sailors.
“Nothing whatever, your honor,” replied Wilson. “The convicts must be
miles away from here.”
“They were not in numbers enough to attack us, I suppose,” added
Mulrady. “Ben Joyce will have gone to recruit his party, with some bandits
like himself, among the bush-rangers who may be lurking about the foot of the
Alps.”
“That is probably the case, Mulrady,” replied Glenarvan. “The rascals are
cowards; they know we are armed, and well armed too. Perhaps they are
waiting for nightfall to commence the attack. We must redouble our
watchfulness. Oh, if we could only get out of this bog, and down the coast; but
this swollen river bars our passage. I would pay its weight in gold for a raft
which would carry us over to the other side.”
“Why does not your honor give orders for a raft to be constructed? We
have plenty of wood.”
“No, Wilson,” replied Glenarvan; “this Snowy is not a river, it is an
impassable torrent.”
John Mangles, the Major, and Paganel just then came out of the wagon on
purpose to examine the state of the river. They found it still so swollen by the
heavy rain that the water was a foot above the level. It formed an impetuous
current, like the American rapids. To venture over that foaming current and
that rushing flood, broken into a thousand eddies and hollows and gulfs, was
impossible.
John Mangles declared the passage impracticable. “But we must not stay
here,” he added, “without attempting anything. What we were going to do
before Ayrton’s treachery is still more necessary now.”
“What do you mean, John?” asked Glenarvan.
“I mean that our need is urgent, and that since we cannot go to Twofold
Bay, we must go to Melbourne. We have still one horse. Give it to me, my
Lord, and I will go to Melbourne.”
“But that will be a dangerous venture, John,” said Glenarvan. “Not to
speak of the perils of a journey of two hundred miles over an unknown
country, the road and the by-ways will be guarded by the accomplices of Ben
Joyce.”
“I know it, my Lord, but I know also that things can’t stay long as they are;
Ayrton only asked a week’s absence to fetch the crew of the DUNCAN, and I
will be back to the Snowy River in six days. Well, my Lord, what are your
commands?”
“Before Glenarvan decides,” said Paganel, “I must make an observation.
That some one must go to Melbourne is evident, but that John Mangles should
be the one to expose himself to the risk, cannot be. He is the captain of the
DUNCAN, and must be careful of his life. I will go instead.”
“That is all very well, Paganel,” said the Major; “but why should you be
the one to go?”
“Are we not here?” said Mulrady and Wilson.
“And do you think,” replied McNabbs, “that a journey of two hundred
miles on horseback frightens me.”
“Friends,” said Glenarvan, “one of us must go, so let it be decided by
drawing lots. Write all our names, Paganel.”
“Not yours, my Lord,” said John Mangles.
“And why not?”
“What! separate you from Lady Helena, and before your wound is healed,
too!”
“Glenarvan,” said Paganel, “you cannot leave the expedition.”
“No,” added the Major. “Your place is here, Edward, you ought not to go.”
“Danger is involved in it,” said Glenarvan, “and I will take my share along
with the rest. Write the names, Paganel, and put mine among them, and I hope
the lot may fall on me.”
His will was obeyed. The names were written, and the lots drawn. Fate
fixed on Mulrady. The brave sailor shouted hurrah! and said: “My Lord, I am
ready to start.” Glenarvan pressed his hand, and then went back to the wagon,
leaving John Mangles and the Major on watch.
Lady Helena was informed of the determination to send a message to
Melbourne, and that they had drawn lots who should go, and Mulrady had
been chosen. Lady Helena said a few kind words to the brave sailor, which
went straight to his heart. Fate could hardly have chosen a better man, for he
was not only brave and intelligent, but robust and superior to all fatigue.
Mulrady’s departure was fixed for eight o’clock, immediately after the
short twilight. Wilson undertook to get the horse ready. He had a project in his
head of changing the horse’s left shoe, for one off the horses that had died in
the night. This would prevent the convicts from tracking Mulrady, or
following him, as they were not mounted.
While Wilson was arranging this, Glenarvan got his letter ready for Tom
Austin, but his wounded arm troubled him, and he asked Paganel to write it for
him. The SAVANT was so absorbed in one fixed idea that he seemed hardly to
know what he was about. In all this succession of vexations, it must be said
the document was always uppermost in Paganel’s mind. He was always
worrying himself about each word, trying to discover some new meaning, and
losing the wrong interpretation of it, and going over and over himself in
perplexities.
He did not hear Glenarvan when he first spoke, but on the request being
made a second time, he said: “Ah, very well. I’m ready.”
While he spoke he was mechanically getting paper from his note-book. He
tore a blank page off, and sat down pencil in hand to write.
Glenarvan began to dictate as follows: “Order to Tom Austin, Chief
Officer, to get to sea without delay, and bring the DUNCAN to—”
Paganel was just finishing the last word, when his eye chanced to fall on
the Australian and New Zealand Gazette lying on the ground. The paper was
so folded that only the last two syllables of the title were visible. Paganel’s
pencil stopped, and he seemed to become oblivious of Glenarvan and the letter
entirely, till his friends called out: “Come, Paganel!”
“Ah!” said the geographer, with a loud exclamation.
“What is the matter?” asked the Major.
“Nothing, nothing,” replied Paganel. Then he muttered to himself, “Aland!
aland! aland!”
He had got up and seized the newspaper. He shook it in his efforts to keep
back the words that involuntarily rose to his lips.
Lady Helena, Mary, Robert, and Glenarvan gazed at him in astonishment,
at a loss to understand this unaccountable agitation. Paganel looked as if a
sudden fit of insanity had come over him. But his excitement did not last. He
became by degrees calmer. The gleam of joy that shone in his eyes died away.
He sat down again, and said quietly:
“When you please, my Lord, I am ready.” Glenarvan resumed his dictation
at once, and the letter was soon completed. It read as follows: “Order to Tom
Austin to go to sea without delay; and take the DUNCAN to Melbourne by the
37th degree of latitude to the eastern coast of Australia.”
“Of Australia?” said Paganel. “Ah yes! of Australia.”
Then he finished the letter, and gave it to Glenarvan to sign, who went
through the necessary formality as well as he could, and closed and sealed the
letter. Paganel, whose hand still trembled with emotion, directed it thus: “Tom
Austin, Chief Officer on board the Yacht DUNCAN, Melbourne.”
Then he got up and went out of the wagon, gesticulating and repeating the
incomprehensible words:
“Aland aland! aland!”
CHAPTER XVIII FOUR DAYS OF ANGUISH
The rest of the day passed on without any further incident. All the
preparations for Mulrady’s journey were completed, and the brave sailor
rejoiced in being able to give his Lordship this proof of devotion.
Paganel had recovered his usual sang-froid and manners. His look, indeed,
betrayed his preoccupation, but he seemed resolved to keep it secret. No doubt
he had strong reasons for this course of action, for the Major heard him
repeating, like a man struggling with himself: “No, no, they would not believe
it; and, besides, what good would it be? It is too late!”
Having taken this resolution, he busied himself with giving Mulrady the
necessary directions for getting to Melbourne, and showed him his way on the
map. All the TRACKS, that is to say, paths through the prairie, came out on
the road to Lucknow. This road, after running right down to the coast took a
sudden bend in the direction of Melbourne. This was the route that must be
followed steadily, for it would not do to attempt a short cut across an almost
unknown country. Nothing, consequently, could be more simple. Mulrady
could not lose his way.
As to dangers, there were none after he had gone a few miles beyond the
encampment, out of the reach of Ben Joyce and his gang. Once past their
hiding place, Mulrady was certain of soon being able to outdistance the
convicts, and execute his important mission successfully.
At six o’clock they all dined together. The rain was falling in torrents. The
tent was not protection enough, and the whole party had to take refuge in the
wagon. This was a sure refuge. The clay kept it firmly imbedded in the soil,
like a fortress resting on sure foundations. The arsenal was composed of seven
carbines and seven revolvers, and could stand a pretty long siege, for they had
plenty of ammunition and provisions. But before six days were over, the
DUNCAN would anchor in Twofold Bay, and twenty-four hours after her
crew would reach the other shore of the Snowy River; and should the passage
still remain impracticable, the convicts at any rate would be forced to retire
before the increased strength. But all depended on Mulrady’s success in his
perilous enterprise.
At eight o’clock it got very dark; now was the time to start. The horse
prepared for Mulrady was brought out. His feet, by way of extra precaution,
were wrapped round with cloths, so that they could not make the least noise on
the ground. The animal seemed tired, and yet the safety of all depended on his
strength and surefootedness. The Major advised Mulrady to let him go gently
as soon as he got past the convicts. Better delay half-a-day than not arrive
safely.
John Mangles gave his sailor a revolver, which he had loaded with the
utmost care. This is a formidable weapon in the hand of a man who does not
tremble, for six shots fired in a few seconds would easily clear a road infested
with criminals. Mulrady seated himself in the saddle ready to start.
“Here is the letter you are to give to Tom Austin,” said Glenarvan. “Don’t
let him lose an hour. He is to sail for Twofold Bay at once; and if he does not
find us there, if we have not managed to cross the Snowy, let him come on to
us without delay. Now go, my brave sailor, and God be with you.”
He shook hands with him, and bade him good-by; and so did Lady Helena
and Mary Grant. A more timorous man than the sailor would have shrunk back
a little from setting out on such a dark, raining night on an errand so full of
danger, across vast unknown wilds. But his farewells were calmly spoken, and
he speedily disappeared down a path which skirted the wood.
At the same moment the gusts of wind redoubled their violence. The high
branches of the eucalyptus clattered together noisily, and bough after bough
fell on the wet ground. More than one great tree, with no living sap, but still
standing hitherto, fell with a crash during this storm. The wind howled amid
the cracking wood, and mingled its moans with the ominous roaring of the
rain. The heavy clouds, driving along toward the east, hung on the ground like
rays of vapor, and deep, cheerless gloom intensified the horrors of the night.
The travelers went back into the wagon immediately Mulrady had gone.
Lady Helena, Mary Grant, Glenarvan and Paganel occupied the first
compartment, which had been hermetically closed. The second was occupied
by Olbinett, Wilson and Robert. The Major and John Mangles were on duty
outside. This precaution was necessary, for an attack on the part of the
convicts would be easy enough, and therefore probable enough.
The two faithful guardians kept close watch, bearing philosophically the
rain and wind that beat on their faces. They tried to pierce through the
darkness so favorable to ambushes, for nothing could be heard but the noise of
the tempest, the sough of the wind, the rattling branches, falling trees, and
roaring of the unchained waters.
At times the wind would cease for a few moments, as if to take breath.
Nothing was audible but the moan of the Snowy River, as it flowed between
the motionless reeds and the dark curtain of gum trees. The silence seemed
deeper in these momentary lulls, and the Major and John Mangles listened
attentively.
During one of these calms a sharp whistle reached them. John Mangles
went hurriedly up to the Major. “You heard that?” he asked.
“Yes,” said McNabbs. “Is it man or beast?”
“A man,” replied John Mangles.
And then both listened. The mysterious whistle was repeated, and
answered by a kind of report, but almost indistinguishable, for the storm was
raging with renewed violence. McNabbs and John Mangles could not hear
themselves speak. They went for comfort under the shelter of the wagon.
At this moment the leather curtains were raised and Glenarvan rejoined his
two companions. He too had heard this ill-boding whistle, and the report
which echoed under the tilt. “Which way was it?” asked he.
“There,” said John, pointing to the dark track in the direction taken by
Mulrady.
“How far?”
“The wind brought it; I should think, three or four miles, at least.”
“Come,” said Glenarvan, putting his gun on his shoulder.
“No,” said the Major. “It is a decoy to get us away from the wagon.”
“But if Mulrady has even now fallen beneath the blows of these rascals?”
exclaimed Glenarvan, seizing McNabbs by the hand.
“We shall know by to-morrow,” said the Major, coolly, determined to
prevent Glenarvan from taking a step which was equally rash and futile.
“You cannot leave the camp, my Lord,” said John. “I will go alone.”
“You will do nothing of the kind!” cried McNabbs, energetically. “Do you
want to have us killed one by one to diminish our force, and put us at the
mercy of these wretches? If Mulrady has fallen a victim to them, it is a
misfortune that must not be repeated. Mulrady was sent, chosen by chance. If
the lot had fallen to me, I should have gone as he did; but I should neither have
asked nor expected assistance.”
In restraining Glenarvan and John Mangles, the Major was right in every
aspect of the case. To attempt to follow the sailor, to run in the darkness of
night among the convicts in their leafy ambush was madness, and more than
that—it was useless. Glenarvan’s party was not so numerous that it could
afford to sacrifice another member of it.
Still Glenarvan seemed as if he could not yield; his hand was always on his
carbine. He wandered about the wagon, and bent a listening ear to the faintest
sound. The thought that one of his men was perhaps mortally wounded,
abandoned to his fate, calling in vain on those for whose sake he had gone
forth, was a torture to him. McNabbs was not sure that he should be able to
restrain him, or if Glenarvan, carried away by his feelings, would not run into
the arms of Ben Joyce.
“Edward,” said he, “be calm. Listen to me as a friend. Think of Lady
Helena, of Mary Grant, of all who are left. And, besides, where would you go?
Where would you find Mulrady? He must have been attacked two miles off. In
what direction? Which track would you follow?”
At that very moment, as if to answer the Major, a cry of distress was heard.
“Listen!” said Glenarvan.
This cry came from the same quarter as the report, but less than a quarter
of a mile off.
Glenarvan, repulsing McNabbs, was already on the track, when at three
hundred paces from the wagon they heard the exclamation: “Help! help!”
The voice was plaintive and despairing. John Mangles and the Major
sprang toward the spot. A few seconds after they perceived among the scrub a
human form dragging itself along the ground and uttering mournful groans. It
was Mulrady, wounded, apparently dying; and when his companions raised
him they felt their hands bathed in blood.
The rain came down with redoubled violence, and the wind raged among
the branches of the dead trees. In the pelting storm, Glenarvan, the Major and
John Mangles transported the body of Mulrady.
On their arrival everyone got up. Paganel, Robert, Wilson and Olbinett left
the wagon, and Lady Helena gave up her compartment to poor Mulrady. The
Major removed the poor fellow’s flannel shirt, which was dripping with blood
and rain. He soon found the wound; it was a stab in the right side.
McNabbs dressed it with great skill. He could not tell whether the weapon
had touched any vital part. An intermittent jet of scarlet blood flowed from it;
the patient’s paleness and weakness showed that he was seriously injured. The
Major washed the wound first with fresh water and then closed the orifice;
after this he put on a thick pad of lint, and then folds of scraped linen held
firmly in place with a bandage. He succeeded in stopping the hemorrhage.
Mulrady was laid on his side, with his head and chest well raised, and Lady
Helena succeeded in making him swallow a few drops of water.
After about a quarter of an hour, the wounded man, who till then had lain
motionless, made a slight movement. His eyes unclosed, his lips muttered
incoherent words, and the Major, bending toward him, heard him repeating:
“My Lord—the letter—Ben Joyce.”
The Major repeated these words, and looked at his companions. What did
Mulrady mean? Ben Joyce had been the attacking party, of course; but why?
Surely for the express purpose of intercepting him, and preventing his arrival
at the DUNCAN. This letter—
Glenarvan searched Mulrady’s pockets. The letter addressed to Tom Austin
was gone!
The night wore away amid anxiety and distress; every moment, they
feared, would be poor Mulrady’s last. He suffered from acute fever. The
Sisters of Charity, Lady Helena and Mary Grant, never left him. Never was
patient so well tended, nor by such sympathetic hands.
Day came, and the rain had ceased. Great clouds filled the sky still; the
ground was strewn with broken branches; the marly soil, soaked by the
torrents of rain, had yielded still more; the approaches to the wagon became
difficult, but it could not sink any deeper.
John Mangles, Paganel, and Glenarvan went, as soon as it was light
enough, to reconnoiter in the neighborhood of the encampment. They revisited
the track, which was still stained with blood. They saw no vestige of Ben
Joyce, nor of his band. They penetrated as far as the scene of the attack. Here
two corpses lay on the ground, struck down by Mulrady’s bullets. One was the
blacksmith of Blackpoint. His face, already changed by death, was a dreadful
spectacle. Glenarvan searched no further. Prudence forbade him to wander
from the camp. He returned to the wagon, deeply absorbed by the critical
position of affairs.
“We must not think of sending another messenger to Melbourne,” said he.
“But we must,” said John Mangles; “and I must try to pass where my sailor
could not succeed.”
“No, John! it is out of the question. You have not even a horse for the
journey, which is full two hundred miles!”
This was true, for Mulrady’s horse, the only one that remained, had not
returned. Had he fallen during the attack on his rider, or was he straying in the
bush, or had the convicts carried him off?
“Come what will,” replied Glenarvan, “we will not separate again. Let us
wait a week, or a fortnight, till the Snowy falls to its normal level. We can then
reach Twofold Bay by short stages, and from there we can send on to the
DUNCAN, by a safer channel, the order to meet us.”
“That seems the only plan,” said Paganel.
“Therefore, my friends,” rejoined Glenarvan, “no more parting. It is too
great a risk for one man to venture alone into a robber-haunted waste. And
now, may God save our poor sailor, and protect the rest of us!”
Glenarvan was right in both points; first in prohibiting all isolated
attempts, and second, in deciding to wait till the passage of the Snowy River
was practicable. He was scarcely thirty miles from Delegete, the first frontier
village of New South Wales, where he would easily find the means of
transport to Twofold Bay, and from there he could telegraph to Melbourne his
orders about the DUNCAN.
These measures were wise, but how late! If Glenarvan had not sent
Mulrady to Lucknow what misfortunes would have been averted, not to speak
of the assassination of the sailor!
When he reached the camp he found his companions in better spirits. They
seemed more hopeful than before. “He is better! he is better!” cried Robert,
running out to meet Lord Glenarvan.
“Mulrady?—”
“Yes, Edward,” answered Lady Helena. “A reaction has set in. The Major
is more confident. Our sailor will live.”
“Where is McNabbs?” asked Glenarvan.
“With him. Mulrady wanted to speak to him, and they must not be
disturbed.”
He then learned that about an hour since, the wounded man had awakened
from his lethargy, and the fever had abated. But the first thing he did on
recovering his memory and speech was to ask for Lord Glenarvan, or, failing
him, the Major. McNabbs seeing him so weak, would have forbidden any
conversation; but Mulrady insisted with such energy that the Major had to give
in. The interview had already lasted some minutes when Glenarvan returned.
There was nothing for it but to await the return of McNabbs.
Presently the leather curtains of the wagon moved, and the Major
appeared. He rejoined his friends at the foot of a gum-tree, where the tent was
placed. His face, usually so stolid, showed that something disturbed him.
When his eyes fell on Lady Helena and the young girl, his glance was full of
sorrow.
Glenarvan questioned him, and extracted the following information: When
he left the camp Mulrady followed one of the paths indicated by Paganel. He
made as good speed as the darkness of the night would allow. He reckoned
that he had gone about two miles when several men—five, he thought—
sprang to his horse’s head. The animal reared; Mulrady seized his revolver and
fired. He thought he saw two of his assailants fall. By the flash he recognized
Ben Joyce. But that was all. He had not time to fire all the barrels. He felt a
violent blow on his side and was thrown to the ground.
Still he did not lose consciousness. The murderers thought he was dead. He
felt them search his pockets, and then heard one of them say: “I have the
letter.”
“Give it to me,” returned Ben Joyce, “and now the DUNCAN is ours.”
At this point of the story, Glenarvan could not help uttering a cry.
McNabbs continued: “‘Now you fellows,’ added Ben Joyce, ‘catch the
horse. In two days I shall be on board the DUNCAN, and in six I shall reach
Twofold Bay. This is to be the rendezvous. My Lord and his party will be still
stuck in the marshes of the Snowy River. Cross the river at the bridge of
Kemple Pier, proceed to the coast, and wait for me. I will easily manage to get
you on board. Once at sea in a craft like the DUNCAN, we shall be masters of
the Indian Ocean.’ ‘Hurrah for Ben Joyce!’ cried the convicts. Mulrady’s horse
was brought, and Ben Joyce disappeared, galloping on the Lucknow Road,
while the band took the road southeast of the Snowy River. Mulrady, though
severely wounded, had the strength to drag himself to within three hundred
paces from the camp, whence we found him almost dead. There,” said
McNabbs, “is the history of Mulrady; and now you can understand why the
brave fellow was so determined to speak.”
This revelation terrified Glenarvan and the rest of the party.
“Pirates! pirates!” cried Glenarvan. “My crew massacred! my DUNCAN
in the hands of these bandits!”
“Yes, for Ben Joyce will surprise the ship,” said the Major, “and then—”
“Well, we must get to the coast first,” said Paganel.
“But how are we to cross the Snowy River?” said Wilson.
“As they will,” replied Glenarvan. “They are to cross at Kemple Pier
Bridge, and so will we.”
“But about Mulrady?” asked Lady Helena.
“We will carry him; we will have relays. Can I leave my crew to the mercy
of Ben Joyce and his gang?”
To cross the Snowy River at Kemple Pier was practicable, but dangerous.
The convicts might entrench themselves at that point, and defend it. They were
at least thirty against seven! But there are moments when people do not
deliberate, or when they have no choice but to go on.
“My Lord,” said John Mangles, “before we throw away our chance, before
venturing to this bridge, we ought to reconnoiter, and I will undertake it.”
“I will go with you, John,” said Paganel.
This proposal was agreed to, and John Mangles and Paganel prepared to
start immediately. They were to follow the course of the Snowy River, follow
its banks till they reached the place indicated by Ben Joyce, and especially
they were to keep out of sight of the convicts, who were probably scouring the
bush.
So the two brave comrades started, well provisioned and well armed, and
were soon out of sight as they threaded their way among the tall reeds by the
river. The rest anxiously awaited their return all day. Evening came, and still
the scouts did not return. They began to be seriously alarmed. At last, toward
eleven o’clock, Wilson announced their arrival. Paganel and John Mangles
were worn out with the fatigues of a ten-mile walk.
“Well, what about the bridge? Did you find it?” asked Glenarvan, with
impetuous eagerness.
“Yes, a bridge of supple-jacks,” said John Mangles. “The convicts passed
over, but—”
“But what?” said Glenarvan, who foreboded some new misfortune.
“They burned it after they passed!” said Paganel.
CHAPTER XIX HELPLESS AND HOPELESS
It was not a time for despair, but action. The bridge at Kemple Pier was
destroyed, but the Snowy River must be crossed, come what might, and they
must reach Twofold Bay before Ben Joyce and his gang, so, instead of wasting
time in empty words, the next day (the 16th of January) John Mangles and
Glenarvan went down to examine the river, and arrange for the passage over.
The swollen and tumultuous waters had not gone down the least. They
rushed on with indescribable fury. It would be risking life to battle with them.
Glenarvan stood gazing with folded arms and downcast face.
“Would you like me to try and swim across?” said John Mangles.
“No, John, no!” said Lord Glenarvan, holding back the bold, daring young
fellow, “let us wait.”
And they both returned to the camp. The day passed in the most intense
anxiety. Ten times Lord Glenarvan went to look at the river, trying to invent
some bold way of getting over; but in vain. Had a torrent of lava rushed
between the shores, it could not have been more impassable.
During these long wasted hours, Lady Helena, under the Major’s advice,
was nursing Mulrady with the utmost skill. The sailor felt a throb of returning
life. McNabbs ventured to affirm that no vital part was injured. Loss of blood
accounted for the patient’s extreme exhaustion. The wound once closed and
the hemorrhage stopped, time and rest would be all that was needed to
complete his cure. Lady Helena had insisted on giving up the first
compartment of the wagon to him, which greatly tried his modesty. The poor
fellow’s greatest trouble was the delay his condition might cause Glenarvan,
and he made him promise that they should leave him in the camp under
Wilson’s care, should the passage of the river become practicable.
But, unfortunately, no passage was practicable, either that day or the next
(January 17); Glenarvan was in despair. Lady Helena and the Major vainly
tried to calm him, and preached patience.
Patience, indeed, when perhaps at this very moment Ben Joyce was
boarding the yacht; when the DUNCAN, loosing from her moorings, was
getting up steam to reach the fatal coast, and each hour was bringing her
nearer.
John Mangles felt in his own breast all that Glenarvan was suffering. He
determined to conquer the difficulty at any price, and constructed a canoe in
the Australian manner, with large sheets of bark of the gum-trees. These sheets
were kept together by bars of wood, and formed a very fragile boat. The
captain and the sailor made a trial trip in it during the day. All that skill, and
strength, and tact, and courage could do they did; but they were scarcely in the
current before they were upside down, and nearly paid with their lives for the
dangerous experiment. The boat disappeared, dragged down by the eddy. John
Mangles and Wilson had not gone ten fathoms, and the river was a mile broad,
and swollen by the heavy rains and melted snows.
Thus passed the 19th and 20th of January. The Major and Glenarvan went
five miles up the river in search of a favorable passage, but everywhere they
found the same roaring, rushing, impetuous torrent. The whole southern slope
of the Australian Alps poured its liquid masses into this single bed.
All hope of saving the DUNCAN was now at an end. Five days had
elapsed since the departure of Ben Joyce. The yacht must be at this moment at
the coast, and in the hands of the convicts.
However, it was impossible that this state of things could last. The
temporary influx would soon be exhausted, and the violence also. Indeed, on
the morning of the 21st, Paganel announced that the water was already lower.
“What does it matter now?” said Glenarvan. “It is too late!”
“That is no reason for our staying longer here,” said the Major.
“Certainly not,” replied John Mangles. “Perhaps tomorrow the river may
be practicable.”
“And will that save my unhappy men?” cried Glenarvan.
“Will your Lordship listen to me?” returned John Mangles. “I know Tom
Austin. He would execute your orders, and set out as soon as departure was
possible. But who knows whether the DUNCAN was ready and her injury
repaired on the arrival of Ben Joyce. And suppose the yacht could not go to
sea; suppose there was a delay of a day, or two days.”
“You are right, John,” replied Glenarvan. “We must get to Twofold Bay;
we are only thirty-five miles from Delegete.”
“Yes,” added Paganel, “and that’s a town where we shall find rapid means
of conveyance. Who knows whether we shan’t arrive in time to prevent a
catastrophe.”
“Let us start,” cried Glenarvan.
John Mangles and Wilson instantly set to work to construct a canoe of
larger dimensions. Experience had proved that the bark was powerless against
the violence of the torrent, and John accordingly felled some of the gum-trees,
and made a rude but solid raft with the trunks. It was a long task, and the day
had gone before the work was ended. It was completed next morning.
By this time the waters had visibly diminished; the torrent had once more
become a river, though a very rapid one, it is true. However, by pursuing a
zigzag course, and overcoming it to a certain extent, John hoped to reach the
opposite shore. At half-past twelve, they embarked provisions enough for a
couple of days. The remainder was left with the wagon and the tent. Mulrady
was doing well enough to be carried over; his convalescence was rapid.
At one o’clock, they all seated themselves on the raft, still moored to the
shore. John Mangles had installed himself at the starboard, and entrusted to
Wilson a sort of oar to steady the raft against the current, and lessen the
leeway. He took his own stand at the back, to steer by means of a large scull;
but, notwithstanding their efforts, Wilson and John Mangles soon found
themselves in an inverse position, which made the action of the oars
impossible.
There was no help for it; they could do nothing to arrest the gyratory
movement of the raft; it turned round with dizzying rapidity, and drifted out of
its course. John Mangles stood with pale face and set teeth, gazing at the
whirling current.
However, the raft had reached the middle of the river, about half a mile
from the starting point. Here the current was extremely strong, and this broke
the whirling eddy, and gave the raft some stability. John and Wilson seized
their oars again, and managed to push it in an oblique direction. This brought
them nearer to the left shore. They were not more than fifty fathoms from it,
when Wilson’s oar snapped short off, and the raft, no longer supported, was
dragged away. John tried to resist at the risk of breaking his own oar, too, and
Wilson, with bleeding hands, seconded his efforts with all his might.
At last they succeeded, and the raft, after a passage of more than half an
hour, struck against the steep bank of the opposite shore. The shock was so
violent that the logs became disunited, the cords broke, and the water bubbled
up between. The travelers had barely time to catch hold of the steep bank.
They dragged out Mulrady and the two dripping ladies. Everyone was safe;
but the provisions and firearms, except the carbine of the Major, went drifting
down with the DEBRIS of the raft.
The river was crossed. The little company found themselves almost
without provisions, thirty-five miles from Delegete, in the midst of the
unknown deserts of the Victoria frontier. Neither settlers nor squatters were to
be met with; it was entirely uninhabited, unless by ferocious bushrangers and
bandits.
They resolved to set off without delay. Mulrady saw clearly that he would
be a great drag on them, and he begged to be allowed to remain, and even to
remain alone, till assistance could be sent from Delegete.
Glenarvan refused. It would be three days before he could reach Delegete,
and five the shore—that is to say, the 26th of January. Now, as the DUNCAN
had left Melbourne on the 16th, what difference would a few days’ delay
make?
“No, my friend,” he said, “I will not leave anyone behind. We will make a
litter and carry you in turn.”
The litter was made of boughs of eucalyptus covered with branches; and,
whether he would or not, Mulrady was obliged to take his place on it.
Glenarvan would be the first to carry his sailor. He took hold of one end and
Wilson of the other, and all set off.
What a sad spectacle, and how lamentably was this expedition to end
which had commenced so well. They were no longer in search of Harry Grant.
This continent, where he was not, and never had been, threatened to prove
fatal to those who sought him. And when these intrepid countrymen of his
should reach the shore, they would find the DUNCAN waiting to take them
home again. The first day passed silently and painfully. Every ten minutes the
litter changed bearers. All the sailor’s comrades took their share in this task
without murmuring, though the fatigue was augmented by the great heat.
In the evening, after a journey of only five miles, they camped under the
gum-trees. The small store of provisions saved from the raft composed the
evening meal. But all they had to depend upon now was the Major’s carbine.
It was a dark, rainy night, and morning seemed as if it would never dawn.
They set off again, but the Major could not find a chance of firing a shot. This
fatal region was only a desert, unfrequented even by animals. Fortunately,
Robert discovered a bustard’s nest with a dozen of large eggs in it, which
Olbinett cooked on hot cinders. These, with a few roots of purslain which
were growing at the bottom of a ravine, were all the breakfast of the 22d.
The route now became extremely difficult. The sandy plains were bristling
with SPINIFEX, a prickly plant, which is called in Melbourne the porcupine.
It tears the clothing to rags, and makes the legs bleed. The courageous ladies
never complained, but footed it bravely, setting an example, and encouraging
one and another by word or look.
They stopped in the evening at Mount Bulla Bulla, on the edge of the
Jungalla Creek. The supper would have been very scant, if McNabbs had not
killed a large rat, the mus conditor, which is highly spoken of as an article of
diet. Olbinett roasted it, and it would have been pronounced even superior to
its reputation had it equaled the sheep in size. They were obliged to be content
with it, however, and it was devoured to the bones.
On the 23d the weary but still energetic travelers started off again. After
having gone round the foot of the mountain, they crossed the long prairies
where the grass seemed made of whalebone. It was a tangle of darts, a medley
of sharp little sticks, and a path had to be cut through either with the hatchet or
fire.
That morning there was not even a question of breakfast. Nothing could be
more barren than this region strewn with pieces of quartz. Not only hunger,
but thirst began to assail the travelers. A burning atmosphere heightened their
discomfort. Glenarvan and his friends could only go half a mile an hour.
Should this lack of food and water continue till evening, they would all sink
on the road, never to rise again.
But when everything fails a man, and he finds himself without resources,
at the very moment when he feels he must give up, then Providence steps in.
Water presented itself in the CEPHALOTES, a species of cup-shaped flower,
filled with refreshing liquid, which hung from the branches of coralliformshaped bushes. They all quenched their thirst with these, and felt new life
returning.
The only food they could find was the same as the natives were forced to
subsist upon, when they could find neither game, nor serpents, nor insects.
Paganel discovered in the dry bed of a creek, a plant whose excellent
properties had been frequently described by one of his colleagues in the
Geographical Society.
It was the NARDOU, a cryptogamous plant of the family Marsilacea, and
the same which kept Burke and King alive in the deserts of the interior. Under
its leaves, which resembled those of the trefoil, there were dried sporules as
large as a lentil, and these sporules, when crushed between two stones, made a
sort of flour. This was converted into coarse bread, which stilled the pangs of
hunger at least. There was a great abundance of this plant growing in the
district, and Olbinett gathered a large supply, so that they were sure of food for
several days.
The next day, the 24th, Mulrady was able to walk part of the way. His
wound was entirely cicatrized. The town of Delegete was not more than ten
miles off, and that evening they camped in longitude 140 degrees, on the very
frontier of New South Wales.
For some hours, a fine but penetrating rain had been falling. There would
have been no shelter from this, if by chance John Mangles had not discovered
a sawyer’s hut, deserted and dilapidated to a degree. But with this miserable
cabin they were obliged to be content. Wilson wanted to kindle a fire to
prepare the NARDOU bread, and he went out to pick up the dead wood
scattered all over the ground. But he found it would not light, the great
quantity of albuminous matter which it contained prevented all combustion.
This is the incombustible wood put down by Paganel in his list of Australian
products.
They had to dispense with fire, and consequently with food too, and sleep
in their wet clothes, while the laughing jackasses, concealed in the high
branches, seemed to ridicule the poor unfortunates. However, Glenarvan was
nearly at the end of his sufferings. It was time. The two young ladies were
making heroic efforts, but their strength was hourly decreasing. They dragged
themselves along, almost unable to walk.
Next morning they started at daybreak. At 11 A. M. Delegete came in sight
in the county of Wellesley, and fifty miles from Twofold Bay.
Means of conveyance were quickly procured here. Hope returned to
Glenarvan as they approached the coast. Perhaps there might have been some
slight delay, and after all they might get there before the arrival of the
DUNCAN. In twenty-four hours they would reach the bay.
At noon, after a comfortable meal, all the travelers installed in a mailcoach, drawn by five strong horses, left Delegete at a gallop. The postilions,
stimulated by a promise of a princely DOUCEUR, drove rapidly along over a
well-kept road. They did not lose a minute in changing horses, which took
place every ten miles. It seemed as if they were infected with Glenarvan’s
zeal. All that day, and night, too, they traveled on at the rate of six miles an
hour.
In the morning at sunrise, a dull murmur fell on their ears, and announced
their approach to the Indian Ocean. They required to go round the bay to gain
the coast at the 37th parallel, the exact point where Tom Austin was to wait
their arrival.
When the sea appeared, all eyes anxiously gazed at the offing. Was the
DUNCAN, by a miracle of Providence, there running close to the shore, as a
month ago, when they crossed Cape Corrientes, they had found her on the
Argentine coast? They saw nothing. Sky and earth mingled in the same
horizon. Not a sail enlivened the vast stretch of ocean.
One hope still remained. Perhaps Tom Austin had thought it his duty to
cast anchor in Twofold Bay, for the sea was heavy, and a ship would not dare
to venture near the shore. “To Eden!” cried Glenarvan. Immediately the mailcoach resumed the route round the bay, toward the little town of Eden, five
miles distant. The postilions stopped not far from the lighthouse, which marks
the entrance of the port. Several vessels were moored in the roadstead, but
none of them bore the flag of Malcolm.
Glenarvan, John Mangles, and Paganel got out of the coach, and rushed to
the custom-house, to inquire about the arrival of vessels within the last few
days.
No ship had touched the bay for a week.
“Perhaps the yacht has not started,” Glenarvan said, a sudden revulsion of
feeling lifting him from despair. “Perhaps we have arrived first.”
John Mangles shook his head. He knew Tom Austin. His first mate would
not delay the execution of an order for ten days.
“I must know at all events how they stand,” said Glenarvan. “Better
certainty than doubt.”
A quarter of an hour afterward a telegram was sent to the syndicate of
shipbrokers in Melbourne. The whole party then repaired to the Victoria Hotel.
At 2 P.M. the following telegraphic reply was received: “LORD
GLENARVAN, Eden.
“Twofold Bay.
“The DUNCAN left on the 16th current. Destination unknown. J.
ANDREWS, S. B.”
The telegram dropped from Glenarvan’s hands.
There was no doubt now. The good, honest Scotch yacht was now a pirate
ship in the hands of Ben Joyce!
So ended this journey across Australia, which had commenced under
circumstances so favorable. All trace of Captain Grant and his shipwrecked
men seemed to be irrevocably lost. This ill success had cost the loss of a ship’s
crew. Lord Glenarvan had been vanquished in the strife; and the courageous
searchers, whom the unfriendly elements of the Pampas had been unable to
check, had been conquered on the Australian shore by the perversity of man.
END OF BOOK TWO
NEW ZEALAND
CHAPTER I A ROUGH CAPTAIN
If ever the searchers after Captain Grant were tempted to despair, surely it
was at this moment when all their hopes were destroyed at a blow. Toward
what quarter of the world should they direct their endeavors? How were they
to explore new countries? The DUNCAN was no longer available, and even
an immediate return to their own land was out of the question. Thus the
enterprise of these generous Scots had failed! Failed! a despairing word that
finds no echo in a brave soul; and yet under the repeated blows of adverse fate,
Glenarvan himself was compelled to acknowledge his inability to prosecute
his devoted efforts.
Mary Grant at this crisis nerved herself to the resolution never to utter the
name of her father. She suppressed her own anguish, when she thought of the
unfortunate crew who had perished. The daughter was merged in the friend,
and she now took upon her to console Lady Glenarvan, who till now had been
her faithful comforter. She was the first to speak of returning to Scotland. John
Mangles was filled with admiration at seeing her so courageous and so
resigned. He wanted to say a word further in the Captain’s interest, but Mary
stopped him with a glance, and afterward said to him: “No, Mr. John, we must
think of those who ventured their lives. Lord Glenarvan must return to
Europe!”
“You are right, Miss Mary,” answered John Mangles; “he must. Beside, the
English authorities must be informed of the fate of the DUNCAN. But do not
despair. Rather than abandon our search I will resume it alone! I will either
find Captain Grant or perish in the attempt!”
It was a serious undertaking to which John Mangles bound himself; Mary
accepted, and gave her hand to the young captain, as if to ratify the treaty. On
John Mangles’side it was a life’s devotion; on Mary’s undying gratitude.
During that day, their departure was finally arranged; they resolved to
reach Melbourne without delay. Next day John went to inquire about the ships
ready to sail. He expected to find frequent communication between Eden and
Victoria.
He was disappointed; ships were scarce. Three or four vessels, anchored in
Twofold Bay, constituted the mercantile fleet of the place; none of them were
bound for Melbourne, nor Sydney, nor Point de Galle, at any of which ports
Glenarvan would have found ships loading for England. In fact, the Peninsular
and Oriental Company has a regular line of packets between these points and
England.
Under these circumstances, what was to be done? Waiting for a ship might
be a tedious affair, for Twofold Bay is not much frequented. Numbers of ships
pass by without touching. After due reflection and discussion, Glenarvan had
nearly decided to follow the coast road to Sydney, when Paganel made an
unexpected proposition.
The geographer had visited Twofold Bay on his own account, and was
aware that there were no means of transport for Sydney or Melbourne. But of
the three vessels anchored in the roadstead one was loading for Auckland, the
capital of the northern island of New Zealand. Paganel’s proposal was to take
the ship in question, and get to Auckland, whence it would be easy to return to
Europe by the boats of the Peninsular and Oriental Company.
This proposition was taken into serious consideration. Paganel on this
occasion dispensed with the volley of arguments he generally indulged in. He
confined himself to the bare proposition, adding that the voyage to New
Zealand was only five or six days—the distance, in fact, being only about a
thousand miles.
By a singular coincidence Auckland is situated on the self-same parallel—
the thirty-seventh—which the explorers had perseveringly followed since they
left the coast of Araucania. Paganel might fairly have used this as an argument
in favor of his scheme; in fact, it was a natural opportunity of visiting the
shores of New Zealand.
But Paganel did not lay stress on this argument. After two mistakes, he
probably hesitated to attempt a third interpretation of the document. Besides,
what could he make of it? It said positively that a “continent” had served as a
refuge for Captain Grant, not an island. Now, New Zealand was nothing but an
island. This seemed decisive. Whether, for this reason, or for some other,
Paganel did not connect any idea of further search with this proposition of
reaching Auckland. He merely observed that regular communication existed
between that point and Great Britain, and that it was easy to take advantage of
it.
John Mangles supported Paganel’s proposal. He advised its adoption, as it
was hopeless to await the problematical arrival of a vessel in Twofold Bay.
But before coming to any decision, he thought it best to visit the ship
mentioned by the geographer. Glenarvan, the Major, Paganel, Robert, and
Mangles himself, took a boat, and a few strokes brought them alongside the
ship anchored two cables’ length from the quay.
It was a brig of 150 tons, named the MACQUARIE. It was engaged in the
coasting trade between the various ports of Australia and New Zealand. The
captain, or rather the “master,” received his visitors gruffly enough. They
perceived that they had to do with a man of no education, and whose manners
were in no degree superior to those of the five sailors of his crew. With a
coarse, red face, thick hands, and a broken nose, blind of an eye, and his lips
stained with the pipe, Will Halley was a sadly brutal looking person. But they
had no choice, and for so short a voyage it was not necessary to be very
particular.
“What do you want?” asked Will Halley, when the strangers stepped on the
poop of his ship.
“The captain,” answered John Mangles.
“I am the captain,” said Halley. “What else do you want?”
“The MACQUARIE is loading for Auckland, I believe?”
“Yes. What else?”
“What does she carry?”
“Everything salable and purchasable. What else?”
“When does she sail?”
“To-morrow at the mid-day tide. What else?”
“Does she take passengers?”
“That depends on who the passengers are, and whether they are satisfied
with the ship’s mess.”
“They would bring their own provisions.”
“What else?”
“What else?”
“Yes. How many are there?”
“Nine; two of them are ladies.”
“I have no cabins.”
“We will manage with such space as may be left at their disposal.”
“What else?”
“Do you agree?” said John Mangles, who was not in the least put out by
the captain’s peculiarities.
“We’ll see,” said the master of the MACQUARIE.
Will Halley took two or three turns on the poop, making it resound with
iron-heeled boots, and then he turned abruptly to John Mangles.
“What would you pay?” said he.
“What do you ask?” replied John.
“Fifty pounds.”
Glenarvan looked consent.
“Very good! Fifty pounds,” replied John Mangles.
“But passage only,” added Halley.
“Yes, passage only.”
“Food extra.”
“Extra.”
“Agreed. And now,” said Will, putting out his hand, “what about the
deposit money?”
“Here is half of the passage-money, twenty-five pounds,” said Mangles,
counting out the sum to the master.
“All aboard to-morrow,” said he, “before noon. Whether or no, I weigh
anchor.”
“We will be punctual.”
This said, Glenarvan, the Major, Robert, Paganel, and John Mangles left
the ship, Halley not so much as touching the oilskin that adorned his red locks.
“What a brute,” exclaimed John.
“He will do,” answered Paganel. “He is a regular sea-wolf.”
“A downright bear!” added the Major.
“I fancy,” said John Mangles, “that the said bear has dealt in human flesh
in his time.”
“What matter?” answered Glenarvan, “as long as he commands the
MACQUARIE, and the MACQUARIE goes to New Zealand. From Twofold
Bay to Auckland we shall not see much of him; after Auckland we shall see
him no more.”
Lady Helena and Mary Grant were delighted to hear that their departure
was arranged for to-morrow. Glenarvan warned them that the MACQUARIE
was inferior in comfort to the DUNCAN. But after what they had gone
through, they were indifferent to trifling annoyances. Wilson was told off to
arrange the accommodation on board the MACQUARIE. Under his busy
brush and broom things soon changed their aspect.
Will Halley shrugged his shoulders, and let the sailor have his way.
Glenarvan and his party gave him no concern. He neither knew, nor cared to
know, their names. His new freight represented fifty pounds, and he rated it far
below the two hundred tons of cured hides which were stowed away in his
hold. Skins first, men after. He was a merchant. As to his sailor qualification,
he was said to be skillful enough in navigating these seas, whose reefs make
them very dangerous.
As the day drew to a close, Glenarvan had a desire to go again to the point
on the coast cut by the 37th parallel. Two motives prompted him. He wanted
to examine once more the presumed scene of the wreck. Ayrton had certainly
been quartermaster on the BRITANNIA, and the BRITANNIA might have
been lost on this part of the Australian coast; on the east coast if not on the
west. It would not do to leave without thorough investigation, a locality which
they were never to revisit.
And then, failing the BRITANNIA, the DUNCAN certainly had fallen into
the hands of the convicts. Perhaps there had been a fight? There might yet be
found on the coast traces of a struggle, a last resistance. If the crew had
perished among the waves, the waves probably had thrown some bodies on the
shore.
Glenarvan, accompanied by his faithful John, went to carry out the final
search. The landlord of the Victoria Hotel lent them two horses, and they set
out on the northern road that skirts Twofold Bay.
It was a melancholy journey. Glenarvan and Captain John trotted along
without speaking, but they understood each other. The same thoughts, the
same anguish harrowed both their hearts. They looked at the sea-worn rocks;
they needed no words of question or answer. John’s well-tried zeal and
intelligence were a guarantee that every point was scrupulously examined, the
least likely places, as well as the sloping beaches and sandy plains where even
the slight tides of the Pacific might have thrown some fragments of wreck. But
no indication was seen that could suggest further search in that quarter—all
trace of the wreck escaped them still.
As to the DUNCAN, no trace either. All that part of Australia, bordering
the ocean, was desert.
Still John Mangles discovered on the skirts of the shore evident traces of
camping, remains of fires recently kindled under solitary Myall-trees. Had a
tribe of wandering blacks passed that way lately? No, for Glenarvan saw a
token which furnished incontestable proof that the convicts had frequented
that part of the coast.
This token was a grey and yellow garment worn and patched, an illomened rag thrown down at the foot of a tree. It bore the convict’s original
number at the Perth Penitentiary. The felon was not there, but his filthy
garments betrayed his passage. This livery of crime, after having clothed some
miscreant, was now decaying on this desert shore.
“You see, John,” said Glenarvan, “the convicts got as far as here! and our
poor comrades of the DUNCAN—”
“Yes,” said John, in a low voice, “they never landed, they perished!”
“Those wretches!” cried Glenarvan. “If ever they fall into my hands I will
avenge my crew—”
Grief had hardened Glenarvan’s features. For some minutes he gazed at the
expanse before him, as if taking a last look at some ship disappearing in the
distance. Then his eyes became dim; he recovered himself in a moment, and
without a word or look, set off at a gallop toward Eden.
The wanderers passed their last evening sadly enough. Their thoughts
recalled all the misfortunes they had encountered in this country. They
remembered how full of well-warranted hope they had been at Cape
Bernouilli, and how cruelly disappointed at Twofold Bay!
Paganel was full of feverish agitation. John Mangles, who had watched
him since the affair at Snowy River, felt that the geographer was hesitating
whether to speak or not to speak. A thousand times he had pressed him with
questions, and failed in obtaining an answer.
But that evening, John, in lighting him to his room, asked him why he was
so nervous.
“Friend John,” said Paganel, evasively, “I am not more nervous to-night
than I always am.”
“Mr. Paganel,” answered John, “you have a secret that chokes you.”
“Well!” cried the geographer, gesticulating, “what can I do? It is stronger
than I!”
“What is stronger?”
“My joy on the one hand, my despair on the other.”
“You rejoice and despair at the same time!”
“Yes; at the idea of visiting New Zealand.”
“Why! have you any trace?” asked John, eagerly. “Have you recovered the
lost tracks?”
“No, friend John. No one returns from New Zealand; but still—you know
human nature. All we want to nourish hope is breath. My device is ‘Spiro
spero,’ and it is the best motto in the world!”
CHAPTER II NAVIGATORS AND THEIR DISCOVERIES
Next day, the 27th of January, the passengers of the MACQUARIE were
installed on board the brig. Will Halley had not offered his cabin to his lady
passengers. This omission was the less to be deplored, for the den was worthy
of the bear.
At half past twelve the anchor was weighed, having been loosed from its
holding-ground with some difficulty. A moderate breeze was blowing from the
southwest. The sails were gradually unfurled; the five hands made slow work.
Wilson offered to assist the crew; but Halley begged him to be quiet and not to
interfere with what did not concern him. He was accustomed to manage his
own affairs, and required neither assistance nor advice.
This was aimed at John Mangles, who had smiled at the clumsiness of
some maneuver. John took the hint, but mentally resolved that he would
nevertheless hold himself in readiness in case the incapacity of the crew
should endanger the safety of the vessel.
However, in time, the sails were adjusted by the five sailors, aided by the
stimulus of the captain’s oaths. The MACQUARIE stood out to sea on the
larboard tack, under all her lower sails, topsails, topgallants, cross-jack, and
jib. By and by, the other sails were hoisted. But in spite of this additional
canvas the brig made very little way. Her rounded bow, the width of her hold,
and her heavy stern, made her a bad sailor, the perfect type of a wooden shoe.
They had to make the best of it. Happily, five days, or, at most, six, would
take them to Auckland, no matter how bad a sailor the MACQUARIE was.
At seven o’clock in the evening the Australian coast and the lighthouse of
the port of Eden had faded out of sight. The ship labored on the lumpy sea,
and rolled heavily in the trough of the waves. The passengers below suffered a
good deal from this motion. But it was impossible to stay on deck, as it rained
violently. Thus they were condemned to close imprisonment.
Each one of them was lost in his own reflections. Words were few. Now
and then Lady Helena and Miss Grant exchanged a few syllables. Glenarvan
was restless; he went in and out, while the Major was impassive. John
Mangles, followed by Robert, went on the poop from time to time, to look at
the weather. Paganel sat in his corner, muttering vague and incoherent words.
What was the worthy geographer thinking of? Of New Zealand, the
country to which destiny was leading him. He went mentally over all his
history; he called to mind the scenes of the past in that ill-omened country.
But in all that history was there a fact, was there a solitary incident that
could justify the discoverers of these islands in considering them as “a
continent.” Could a modern geographer or a sailor concede to them such a
designation. Paganel was always revolving the meaning of the document. He
was possessed with the idea; it became his ruling thought. After Patagonia,
after Australia, his imagination, allured by a name, flew to New Zealand. But
in that direction, one point, and only one, stood in his way.
“Contin—contin,” he repeated, “that must mean continent!”
And then he resumed his mental retrospect of the navigators who made
known to us these two great islands of the Southern Sea.
It was on the 13th of December, 1642, that the Dutch navigator Tasman,
after discovering Van Diemen’s Land, sighted the unknown shores of New
Zealand. He coasted along for several days, and on the 17th of December his
ships penetrated into a large bay, which, terminating in a narrow strait,
separated the two islands.
The northern island was called by the natives Ikana-Mani, a word which
signifies the fish of Mani. The southern island was called Tavai-Pouna-Mou,
“the whale that yields the green-stones.”
Abel Tasman sent his boats on shore, and they returned accompanied by
two canoes and a noisy company of natives. These savages were middle
height, of brown or yellow complexion, angular bones, harsh voices, and black
hair, which was dressed in the Japanese manner, and surmounted by a tall
white feather.
This first interview between Europeans and aborigines seemed to promise
amicable and lasting intercourse. But the next day, when one of Tasman’s
boats was looking for an anchorage nearer to the land, seven canoes, manned
by a great number of natives, attacked them fiercely. The boat capsized and
filled. The quartermaster in command was instantly struck with a badlysharpened spear, and fell into the sea. Of his six companions four were killed;
the other two and the quartermaster were able to swim to the ships, and were
picked up and recovered.
After this sad occurrence Tasman set sail, confining his revenge to giving
the natives a few musket-shots, which probably did not reach them. He left
this bay—which still bears the name of Massacre Bay—followed the western
coast, and on the 5th of January, anchored near the northern-most point. Here
the violence of the surf, as well as the unfriendly attitude of the natives,
prevented his obtaining water, and he finally quitted these shores, giving them
the name Staten-land or the Land of the States, in honor of the States-General.
The Dutch navigator concluded that these islands were adjacent to the
islands of the same name on the east of Terra del Fuego, at the southern point
of the American continent. He thought he had found “the Great Southern
Continent.”
“But,” said Paganel to himself, “what a seventeenth century sailor might
call a ‘continent’ would never stand for one with a nineteenth century man. No
such mistake can be supposed! No! there is something here that baffles me.”
CHAPTER III THE MARTYR-ROLL OF NAVIGATORS
On the 31st of January, four days after starting, the MACQUARIE had not
done two-thirds of the distance between Australia and New Zealand. Will
Halley took very little heed to the working of the ship; he let things take their
chance. He seldom showed himself, for which no one was sorry. No one
would have complained if he had passed all his time in his cabin, but for the
fact that the brutal captain was every day under the influence of gin or brandy.
His sailors willingly followed his example, and no ship ever sailed more
entirely depending on Providence than the MACQUARIE did from Twofold
Bay.
This unpardonable carelessness obliged John Mangles to keep a watchful
eye ever open. Mulrady and Wilson more than once brought round the helm
when some careless steering threatened to throw the ship on her beam-ends.
Often Will Halley would interfere and abuse the two sailors with a volley of
oaths. The latter, in their impatience, would have liked nothing better than to
bind this drunken captain, and lower him into the hold, for the rest of the
voyage. But John Mangles succeeded, after some persuasion, in calming their
well-grounded indignation.
Still, the position of things filled him with anxiety; but, for fear of alarming
Glenarvan, he spoke only to Paganel or the Major. McNabbs recommended
the same course as Mulrady and Wilson.
“If you think it would be for the general good, John,” said McNabbs, “you
should not hesitate to take the command of the vessel. When we get to
Auckland the drunken imbecile can resume his command, and then he is at
liberty to wreck himself, if that is his fancy.”
“All that is very true, Mr. McNabbs, and if it is absolutely necessary I will
do it. As long as we are on open sea, a careful lookout is enough; my sailors
and I are watching on the poop; but when we get near the coast, I confess I
shall be uneasy if Halley does not come to his senses.”
“Could not you direct the course?” asked Paganel.
“That would be difficult,” replied John. “Would you believe it that there is
not a chart on board?”
“Is that so?”
“It is indeed. The MACQUARIE only does a coasting trade between Eden
and Auckland, and Halley is so at home in these waters that he takes no
observations.”
“I suppose he thinks the ship knows the way, and steers herself.” “Ha! ha!”
laughed John Mangles; “I do not believe in ships that steer themselves; and if
Halley is drunk when we get among soundings, he will get us all into trouble.”
“Let us hope,” said Paganel, “that the neighborhood of land will bring him
to his senses.”
“Well, then,” said McNabbs, “if needs were, you could not sail the
MACQUARIE into Auckland?”
“Without a chart of the coast, certainly not. The coast is very dangerous. It
is a series of shallow fiords as irregular and capricious as the fiords of
Norway. There are many reefs, and it requires great experience to avoid them.
The strongest ship would be lost if her keel struck one of those rocks that are
submerged but a few feet below the water.”
“In that case those on board would have to take refuge on the coast.”
“If there was time.”
“A terrible extremity,” said Paganel, “for they are not hospitable shores,
and the dangers of the land are not less appalling than the dangers of the sea.”
“You refer to the Maories, Monsieur Paganel?” asked John Mangles.
“Yes, my friend. They have a bad name in these waters. It is not a matter of
timid or brutish Australians, but of an intelligent and sanguinary race,
cannibals greedy of human flesh, man-eaters to whom we should look in vain
for pity.”
“Well, then,” exclaimed the Major, “if Captain Grant had been wrecked on
the coast of New Zealand, you would dissuade us from looking for him.”
“Oh, you might search on the coasts,” replied the geographer, “because
you might find traces of the BRITANNIA, but not in the interior, for it would
be perfectly useless. Every European who ventures into these fatal districts
falls into the hands of the Maories, and a prisoner in the hands of the Maories
is a lost man. I have urged my friends to cross the Pampas, to toil over the
plains of Australia, but I will never lure them into the mazes of the New
Zealand forest. May heaven be our guide, and keep us from ever being thrown
within the power of those fierce natives!”
CHAPTER IV THE WRECK OF THE “MACQUARIE”
Still this wearisome voyage dragged on. On the 2d of February, six days
from starting, the MACQUARIE had not yet made a nearer acquaintance with
the shores of Auckland. The wind was fair, nevertheless, and blew steadily
from the southwest; but the currents were against the ship’s course, and she
scarcely made any way. The heavy, lumpy sea strained her cordage, her
timbers creaked, and she labored painfully in the trough of the sea. Her
standing rigging was so out of order that it allowed play to the masts, which
were violently shaken at every roll of the sea.
Fortunately, Will Halley was not a man in a hurry, and did not use a press
of canvas, or his masts would inevitably have come down. John Mangles
therefore hoped that the wretched hull would reach port without accident; but
it grieved him that his companions should have to suffer so much discomfort
from the defective arrangements of the brig.
But neither Lady Helena nor Mary Grant uttered a word of complaint,
though the continuous rain obliged them to stay below, where the want of air
and the violence of the motion were painfully felt. They often braved the
weather, and went on the poop till driven down again by the force of a sudden
squall. Then they returned to the narrow space, fitter for stowing cargo than
accommodating passengers, especially ladies.
Their friends did their best to amuse them. Paganel tried to beguile the
time with his stories, but it was a hopeless case. Their minds were so
distracted at this change of route as to be quite unhinged. Much as they had
been interested in his dissertation on the Pampas, or Australia, his lectures on
New Zealand fell on cold and indifferent ears. Besides, they were going to this
new and ill-reputed country without enthusiasm, without conviction, not even
of their own free will, but solely at the bidding of destiny.
Of all the passengers on board the MACQUARIE, the most to be pitied
was Lord Glenarvan. He was rarely to be seen below. He could not stay in one
place. His nervous organization, highly excited, could not submit to
confinement between four narrow bulkheads. All day long, even all night,
regardless of the torrents of rain and the dashing waves, he stayed on the poop,
sometimes leaning on the rail, sometimes walking to and fro in feverish
agitation. His eyes wandered ceaselessly over the blank horizon. He scanned it
eagerly during every short interval of clear weather. It seemed as if he sought
to question the voiceless waters; he longed to tear away the veil of fog and
vapor that obscured his view. He could not be resigned, and his features
expressed the bitterness of his grief. He was a man of energy, till now happy
and powerful, and deprived in a moment of power and happiness. John
Mangles bore him company, and endured with him the inclemency of the
weather. On this day Glenarvan looked more anxiously than ever at each point
where a break in the mist enabled him to do so. John came up to him and said,
“Your Lordship is looking out for land?”
Glenarvan shook his head in dissent.
“And yet,” said the young captain, “you must be longing to quit this vessel.
We ought to have seen the lights of Auckland thirty-six hours ago.”
Glenarvan made no reply. He still looked, and for a moment his glass was
pointed toward the horizon to windward.
“The land is not on that side, my Lord,” said John Mangles. “Look more to
starboard.”
“Why, John?” replied Glenarvan. “I am not looking for the land.”
“What then, my Lord?”
“My yacht! the DUNCAN,” said Glenarvan, hotly. “It must be here on
these coasts, skimming these very waves, playing the vile part of a pirate! It is
here, John; I am certain of it, on the track of vessels between Australia and
New Zealand; and I have a presentiment that we shall fall in with her.”
“God keep us from such a meeting!”
“Why, John?”
“Your Lordship forgets our position. What could we do in this ship if the
DUNCAN gave chase. We could not even fly!”
“Fly, John?”
“Yes, my Lord; we should try in vain! We should be taken, delivered up to
the mercy of those wretches, and Ben Joyce has shown us that he does not stop
at a crime! Our lives would be worth little. We would fight to the death, of
course, but after that! Think of Lady Glenarvan; think of Mary Grant!”
“Poor girls!” murmured Glenarvan. “John, my heart is broken; and
sometimes despair nearly masters me. I feel as if fresh misfortunes awaited us,
and that Heaven itself is against us. It terrifies me!”
“You, my Lord?”
“Not for myself, John, but for those I love—whom you love, also.”
“Keep up your heart, my Lord,” said the young captain. “We must not look
out for troubles. The MACQUARIE sails badly, but she makes some way
nevertheless. Will Halley is a brute, but I am keeping my eyes open, and if the
coast looks dangerous, I will put the ship’s head to sea again. So that, on that
score, there is little or no danger. But as to getting alongside the DUNCAN!
God forbid! And if your Lordship is bent on looking out for her, let it be in
order to give her a wide berth.”
John Mangles was right. An encounter with the DUNCAN would have
been fatal to the MACQUARIE. There was every reason to fear such an
engagement in these narrow seas, in which pirates could ply their trade
without risk. However, for that day at least, the yacht did not appear, and the
sixth night from their departure from Twofold Bay came, without the fears of
John Mangles being realized.
But that night was to be a night of terrors. Darkness came on almost
suddenly at seven o’clock in the evening; the sky was very threatening. The
sailor instinct rose above the stupefaction of the drunkard and roused Will
Halley. He left his cabin, rubbed his eyes, and shook his great red head. Then
he drew a great deep breath of air, as other people swallow a draught of water
to revive themselves. He examined the masts. The wind freshened, and
veering a point more to the westward, blew right for the New Zealand coast.
Will Halley, with many an oath, called his men, tightened his topmast
cordage, and made all snug for the night. John Mangles approved in silence.
He had ceased to hold any conversation with the coarse seaman; but neither
Glenarvan nor he left the poop. Two hours after a stiff breeze came on. Will
Halley took in the lower reef of his topsails. The maneuver would have been a
difficult job for five men if the MACQUARIE had not carried a double yard,
on the American plan. In fact, they had only to lower the upper yard to bring
the sail to its smallest size.
Two hours passed; the sea was rising. The MACQUARIE was struck so
violently that it seemed as if her keel had touched the rocks. There was no real
danger, but the heavy vessel did not rise easily to the waves. By and by the
returning waves would break over the deck in great masses. The boat was
washed out of the davits by the force of the water.
John Mangles never released his watch. Any other ship would have made
no account of a sea like this; but with this heavy craft there was a danger of
sinking by the bow, for the deck was filled at every lurch, and the sheet of
water not being able to escape quickly by the scuppers, might submerge the
ship. It would have been the wisest plan to prepare for emergency by knocking
out the bulwarks with an ax to facilitate their escape, but Halley refused to
take this precaution.
But a greater danger was at hand, and one that it was too late to prevent.
About half-past eleven, John Mangles and Wilson, who stayed on deck
throughout the gale, were suddenly struck by an unusual noise. Their nautical
instincts awoke. John seized the sailor’s hand. “The reef!” said he.
“Yes,” said Wilson; “the waves breaking on the bank.”
“Not more than two cables’ length off?”
“At farthest? The land is there!”
John leaned over the side, gazed into the dark water, and called out,
“Wilson, the lead!”
The master, posted forward, seemed to have no idea of his position. Wilson
seized the lead-line, sprang to the fore-chains, and threw the lead; the rope ran
out between his fingers, at the third knot the lead stopped.
“Three fathoms,” cried Wilson.
“Captain,” said John, running to Will Halley, “we are on the breakers.”
Whether or not he saw Halley shrug his shoulders is of very little
importance. But he hurried to the helm, put it hard down, while Wilson,
leaving the line, hauled at the main-topsail brace to bring the ship to the wind.
The man who was steering received a smart blow, and could not comprehend
the sudden attack.
“Let her go! Let her go!” said the young captain, working her to get away
from the reefs.
For half a minute the starboard side of the vessel was turned toward them,
and, in spite of the darkness, John could discern a line of foam which moaned
and gleamed four fathoms away.
At this moment, Will Halley, comprehending the danger, lost his head. His
sailors, hardly sobered, could not understand his orders. His incoherent words,
his contradictory orders showed that this stupid sot had quite lost his selfcontrol. He was taken by surprise at the proximity of the land, which was eight
miles off, when he thought it was thirty or forty miles off. The currents had
thrown him out of his habitual track, and this miserable slave of routine was
left quite helpless.
Still the prompt maneuver of John Mangles succeeded in keeping the
MACQUARIE off the breakers. But John did not know the position. For
anything he could tell he was girdled in by reefs. The wind blew them strongly
toward the east, and at every lurch they might strike.
In fact, the sound of the reef soon redoubled on the starboard side of the
bow. They must luff again. John put the helm down again and brought her up.
The breakers increased under the bow of the vessel, and it was necessary to
put her about to regain the open sea. Whether she would be able to go about
under shortened sail, and badly trimmed as she was, remained to be seen, but
there was nothing else to be done.
“Helm hard down!” cried Mangles to Wilson.
The MACQUARIE began to near the new line of reefs: in another moment
the waves were seen dashing on submerged rocks. It was a moment of
inexpressible anxiety. The spray was luminous, just as if lit up by sudden
phosphorescence. The roaring of the sea was like the voice of those ancient
Tritons whom poetic mythology endowed with life. Wilson and Mulrady hung
to the wheel with all their weight. Some cordage gave way, which endangered
the foremast. It seemed doubtful whether she would go about without further
damage.
Suddenly the wind fell and the vessel fell back, and turning her became
hopeless. A high wave caught her below, carried her up on the reefs, where she
struck with great violence. The foremast came down with all the fore-rigging.
The brig rose twice, and then lay motionless, heeled over on her port side at an
angle of 30 degrees.
The glass of the skylight had been smashed to powder. The passengers
rushed out. But the waves were sweeping the deck from one side to the other,
and they dared not stay there. John Mangles, knowing the ship to be safely
lodged in the sand, begged them to return to their own quarters.
“Tell me the truth, John,” said Glenarvan, calmly.
“The truth, my Lord, is that we are at a standstill. Whether the sea will
devour us is another question; but we have time to consider.”
“It is midnight?”
“Yes, my Lord, and we must wait for the day.”
“Can we not lower the boat?”
“In such a sea, and in the dark, it is impossible. And, besides, where could
we land?”
“Well, then, John, let us wait for the daylight.”
Will Halley, however, ran up and down the deck like a maniac. His crew
had recovered their senses, and now broached a cask of brandy, and began to
drink. John foresaw that if they became drunk, terrible scenes would ensue.
The captain could not be relied on to restrain them; the wretched man tore
his hair and wrung his hands. His whole thought was his uninsured cargo. “I
am ruined! I am lost!” he would cry, as he ran from side to side.
John Mangles did not waste time on him. He armed his two companions,
and they all held themselves in readiness to resist the sailors who were filling
themselves with brandy, seasoned with fearful blasphemies.
“The first of these wretches that comes near the ladies, I will shoot like a
dog,” said the Major, quietly.
The sailors doubtless saw that the passengers were determined to hold their
own, for after some attempts at pillage, they disappeared to their own quarters.
John Mangles thought no more of these drunken rascals, and waited
impatiently for the dawn. The ship was now quite motionless. The sea became
gradually calmer. The wind fell. The hull would be safe for some hours yet. At
daybreak John examined the landing-place; the yawl, which was now their
only boat, would carry the crew and the passengers. It would have to make
three trips at least, as it could only hold four.
As he was leaning on the skylight, thinking over the situation of affairs,
John Mangles could hear the roaring of the surf. He tried to pierce the
darkness. He wondered how far it was to the land they longed for no less than
dreaded. A reef sometimes extends for miles along the coast. Could their
fragile boat hold out on a long trip?
While John was thus ruminating and longing for a little light from the
murky sky, the ladies, relying on him, slept in their little berths. The stationary
attitude of the brig insured them some hours of repose. Glenarvan, John, and
their companions, no longer disturbed by the noise of the crew who were now
wrapped in a drunken sleep, also refreshed themselves by a short nap, and a
profound silence reigned on board the ship, herself slumbering peacefully on
her bed of sand.
Toward four o’clock the first peep of dawn appeared in the east. The
clouds were dimly defined by the pale light of the dawn. John returned to the
deck. The horizon was veiled with a curtain of fog. Some faint outlines were
shadowed in the mist, but at a considerable height. A slight swell still agitated
the sea, but the more distant waves were undistinguishable in a motionless
bank of clouds.
John waited. The light gradually increased, and the horizon acquired a rosy
hue. The curtain slowly rose over the vast watery stage. Black reefs rose out of
the waters. Then a line became defined on the belt of foam, and there gleamed
a luminous beacon-light point behind a low hill which concealed the scarcely
risen sun. There was the land, less than nine miles off.
“Land ho!” cried John Mangles.
His companions, aroused by his voice, rushed to the poop, and gazed in
silence at the coast whose outline lay on the horizon. Whether they were
received as friends or enemies, that coast must be their refuge.
“Where is Halley?” asked Glenarvan.
“I do not know, my Lord,” replied John Mangles.
“Where are the sailors?”
“Invisible, like himself.”
“Probably dead drunk, like himself,” added McNabbs.
“Let them be called,” said Glenarvan, “we cannot leave them on the ship.”
Mulrady and Wilson went down to the forecastle, and two minutes after
they returned. The place was empty! They then searched between decks, and
then the hold. But found no trace of Will Halley nor his sailors.
“What! no one?” exclaimed Glenarvan.
“Could they have fallen into the sea?” asked Paganel.
“Everything is possible,” replied John Mangles, who was getting uneasy.
Then turning toward the stern: “To the boat!” said he.
Wilson and Mulrady followed to launch the yawl. The yawl was gone.
CHAPTER V CANNIBALS
Will Halley and his crew, taking advantage of the darkness of night and the
sleep of the passengers, had fled with the only boat. There could be no doubt
about it. The captain, whose duty would have kept him on board to the last,
had been the first to quit the ship.
“The cowards are off!” said John Mangles. “Well, my Lord, so much the
better. They have spared us some trying scenes.”
“No doubt,” said Glenarvan; “besides we have a captain of our own, and
courageous, if unskillful sailors, your companions, John. Say the word, and we
are ready to obey.”
The Major, Paganel, Robert, Wilson, Mulrady, Olbinett himself, applauded
Glenarvan’s speech, and ranged themselves on the deck, ready to execute their
captain’s orders.
“What is to be done?” asked Glenarvan.
It was evident that raising the MACQUARIE was out of the question, and
no less evident that she must be abandoned. Waiting on board for succor that
might never come, would have been imprudence and folly. Before the arrival
of a chance vessel on the scene, the MACQUARIE would have broken up.
The next storm, or even a high tide raised by the winds from seaward, would
roll it on the sands, break it up into splinters, and scatter them on the shore.
John was anxious to reach the land before this inevitable consummation.
He proposed to construct a raft strong enough to carry the passengers, and
a sufficient quantity of provisions, to the coast of New Zealand.
There was no time for discussion, the work was to be set about at once, and
they had made considerable progress when night came and interrupted them.
Toward eight o’clock in the evening, after supper, while Lady Helena and
Mary Grant slept in their berths, Paganel and his friends conversed on serious
matters as they walked up and down the deck. Robert had chosen to stay with
them. The brave boy listened with all his ears, ready to be of use, and willing
to enlist in any perilous adventure.
Paganel asked John Mangles whether the raft could not follow the coast as
far as Auckland, instead of landing its freight on the coast.
John replied that the voyage was impossible with such an unmanageable
craft.
“And what we cannot do on a raft could have been done in the ship’s
boat?”
“Yes, if necessary,” answered John; “but we should have had to sail by day
and anchor at night.”
“Then those wretches who abandoned us—”
“Oh, as for them,” said John, “they were drunk, and in the darkness I have
no doubt they paid for their cowardice with their lives.”
“So much the worse for them and for us,” replied Paganel; “for the boat
would have been very useful to us.”
“What would you have, Paganel? The raft will bring us to the shore,” said
Glenarvan.
“The very thing I would fain avoid,” exclaimed the geographer.
“What! do you think another twenty miles after crossing the Pampas and
Australia, can have any terrors for us, hardened as we are to fatigue?”
“My friend,” replied Paganel, “I do not call in question our courage nor the
bravery of our friends. Twenty miles would be nothing in any other country
than New Zealand. You cannot suspect me of faint-heartedness. I was the first
to persuade you to cross America and Australia. But here the case is different.
I repeat, anything is better than to venture into this treacherous country.”
“Anything is better, in my judgment,” said John Mangles, “than braving
certain destruction on a stranded vessel.”
“What is there so formidable in New Zealand?” asked Glenarvan.
“The savages,” said Paganel.
“The savages!” repeated Glenarvan. “Can we not avoid them by keeping to
the shore? But in any case what have we to fear? Surely, two resolute and
well-armed Europeans need not give a thought to an attack by a handful of
miserable beings.”
Paganel shook his head. “In this case there are no miserable beings to
contend with. The New Zealanders are a powerful race, who are rebelling
against English rule, who fight the invaders, and often beat them, and who
always eat them!”
“Cannibals!” exclaimed Robert, “cannibals?” Then they heard him
whisper, “My sister! Lady Helena.”
“Don’t frighten yourself, my boy,” said Glenarvan; “our friend Paganel
exaggerates.”
“Far from it,” rejoined Paganel. “Robert has shown himself a man, and I
treat him as such, in not concealing the truth from him.”
Paganel was right. Cannibalism has become a fixed fact in New Zealand,
as it is in the Fijis and in Torres Strait. Superstition is no doubt partly to blame,
but cannibalism is certainly owing to the fact that there are moments when
game is scarce and hunger great. The savages began by eating human flesh to
appease the demands of an appetite rarely satiated; subsequently the priests
regulated and satisfied the monstrous custom. What was a meal, was raised to
the dignity of a ceremony, that is all.
Besides, in the eyes of the Maories, nothing is more natural than to eat one
another. The missionaries often questioned them about cannibalism. They
asked them why they devoured their brothers; to which the chiefs made
answer that fish eat fish, dogs eat men, men eat dogs, and dogs eat one
another. Even the Maori mythology has a legend of a god who ate another
god; and with such a precedent, who could resist eating his neighbor?
Another strange notion is, that in eating a dead enemy they consume his
spiritual being, and so inherit his soul, his strength and his bravery, which they
hold are specially lodged in the brain. This accounts for the fact that the brain
figures in their feasts as the choicest delicacy, and is offered to the most
honored guest.
But while he acknowledged all this, Paganel maintained, not without a
show of reason, that sensuality, and especially hunger, was the first cause of
cannibalism among the New Zealanders, and not only among the Polynesian
races, but also among the savages of Europe.
“For,” said he, “cannibalism was long prevalent among the ancestors of the
most civilized people, and especially (if the Major will not think me personal)
among the Scotch.”
“Really,” said McNabbs.
“Yes, Major,” replied Paganel. “If you read certain passages of Saint
Jerome, on the Atticoli of Scotland, you will see what he thought of your
forefathers. And without going so far back as historic times, under the reign of
Elizabeth, when Shakespeare was dreaming out his Shy-lock, a Scotch bandit,
Sawney Bean, was executed for the crime of cannibalism. Was it religion that
prompted him to cannibalism? No! it was hunger.”
“Hunger?” said John Mangles.
“Hunger!” repeated Paganel; “but, above all, the necessity of the
carnivorous appetite of replacing the bodily waste, by the azote contained in
animal tissues. The lungs are satisfied with a provision of vegetable and
farinaceous food. But to be strong and active the body must be supplied with
those plastic elements that renew the muscles. Until the Maories become
members of the Vegetarian Association they will eat meat, and human flesh as
meat.”
“Why not animal flesh?” asked Glenarvan.
“Because they have no animals,” replied Paganel; “and that ought to be
taken into account, not to extenuate, but to explain, their cannibal habits.
Quadrupeds, and even birds, are rare on these inhospitable shores, so that the
Maories have always eaten human flesh. There are even ‘man-eating seasons,’
as there are in civilized countries hunting seasons. Then begin the great wars,
and whole tribes are served up on the tables of the conquerors.”
“Well, then,” said Glenarvan, “according to your mode of reasoning,
Paganel, cannibalism will not cease in New Zealand until her pastures teem
with sheep and oxen.”
“Evidently, my dear Lord; and even then it will take years to wean them
from Maori flesh, which they prefer to all others; for the children will still
have a relish for what their fathers so highly appreciated. According to them it
tastes like pork, with even more flavor. As to white men’s flesh, they do not
like it so well, because the whites eat salt with their food, which gives a
peculiar flavor, not to the taste of connoisseurs.”
“They are dainty,” said the Major. “But, black or white, do they eat it raw,
or cook it?”
“Why, what is that to you, Mr. McNabbs?” cried Robert.
“What is that to me!” exclaimed the Major, earnestly. “If I am to make a
meal for a cannibal, I should prefer being cooked.”
“Why?”
“Because then I should be sure of not being eaten alive!”
“Very good. Major,” said Paganel; “but suppose they cooked you alive?”
“The fact is,” answered the Major, “I would not give half-a-crown for the
choice!”
“Well, McNabbs, if it will comfort you—you may as well be told—the
New Zealanders do not eat flesh without cooking or smoking it. They are very
clever and experienced in cookery. For my part, I very much dislike the idea of
being eaten! The idea of ending one’s life in the maw of a savage! bah!”
“The conclusion of all,” said John Mangles, “is that we must not fall into
their hands. Let us hope that one day Christianity will abolish all these
monstrous customs.”
“Yes, we must hope so,” replied Paganel; “but, believe me, a savage who
has tasted human flesh, is not easily persuaded to forego it. I will relate two
facts which prove it.”
“By all means let us have the facts, Paganel,” said Glenarvan.
“The first is narrated in the chronicles of the Jesuit Society in Brazil. A
Portuguese missionary was one day visiting an old Brazilian woman who was
very ill. She had only a few days to live. The Jesuit inculcated the truths of
religion, which the dying woman accepted, without objection. Then having
attended to her spiritual wants, he bethought himself of her bodily needs, and
offered her some European delicacies. ‘Alas,’ said she, ‘my digestion is too
weak to bear any kind of food. There is only one thing I could fancy, and
nobody here could get it for me.’ ‘What is it?’ asked the Jesuit. ‘Ah! my son,’
said she, ‘it is the hand of a little boy! I feel as if I should enjoy munching the
little bones!’”
“Horrid! but I wonder is it so very nice?” said Robert.
“My second tale will answer you, my boy,” said Paganel: “One day a
missionary was reproving a cannibal for the horrible custom, so abhorrent to
God’s laws, of eating human flesh! ‘And beside,’said he, ‘it must be so nasty!’
‘Oh, father,’ said the savage, looking greedily at the missionary, ‘say that God
forbids it! That is a reason for what you tell us. But don’t say it is nasty! If you
had only tasted it!’”
CHAPTER VI A DREADED COUNTRY
Paganel’s facts were indisputable. The cruelty of the New Zealanders was
beyond a doubt, therefore it was dangerous to land. But had the danger been a
hundredfold greater, it had to be faced. John Mangles felt the necessity of
leaving without delay a vessel doomed to certain and speedy destruction.
There were two dangers, one certain and the other probable, but no one could
hesitate between them.
As to their chance of being picked up by a passing vessel, they could not
reasonably hope for it. The MACQUARIE was not in the track of ships bound
to New Zealand. They keep further north for Auckland, further south for New
Plymouth, and the ship had struck just between these two points, on the desert
region of the shores of Ika-na-Mani, a dangerous, difficult coast, and infested
by desperate characters.
“When shall we get away?” asked Glenarvan.
“To-morrow morning at ten o’clock,” replied John Mangles. “The tide will
then turn and carry us to land.”
Next day, February 5, at eight o’clock, the raft was finished. John had
given all his attention to the building of this structure. The foreyard, which did
very well for mooring the anchors, was quite inadequate to the transport of
passengers and provisions. What was needed was a strong, manageable raft,
that would resist the force of the waves during a passage of nine miles.
Nothing but the masts could supply suitable materials.
Wilson and Mulrady set to work; the rigging was cut clear, and the
mainmast, chopped away at the base, fell over the starboard rail, which
crashed under its weight. The MACQUARIE was thus razed like a pontoon.
When the lower mast, the topmasts, and the royals were sawn and split, the
principal pieces of the raft were ready. They were then joined to the fragments
of the foremast and the whole was fastened securely together. John took the
precaution to place in the interstices half a dozen empty barrels, which would
raise the structure above the level of the water. On this strong foundation,
Wilson laid a kind of floor in open work, made of the gratings off the hatches.
The spray could then dash on the raft without staying there, and the passengers
would be kept dry. In addition to this, the hose-pipes firmly lashed together
formed a kind of circular barrier which protected the deck from the waves.
That morning, John seeing that the wind was in their favor, rigged up the
royal-yard in the middle of the raft as a mast. It was stayed with shrouds, and
carried a makeshift sail. A large broad-bladed oar was fixed behind to act as a
rudder in case the wind was sufficient to require it. The greatest pains had
been expended on strengthening the raft to resist the force of the waves, but
the question remained whether, in the event of a change of wind, they could
steer, or indeed, whether they could hope ever to reach the land.
At nine o’clock they began to load. First came the provisions, in quantity
sufficient to last till they should reach Auckland, for they could not count on
the productions of this barren region.
Olbinett’s stores furnished some preserved meat which remained of the
purchase made for their voyage in the MACQUARIE. This was but a scanty
resource. They had to fall back on the coarse viands of the ship; sea biscuits of
inferior quality, and two casks of salt fish. The steward was quite crestfallen.
These provisions were put in hermetically sealed cases, staunch and safe
from sea water, and then lowered on to the raft and strongly lashed to the foot
of the mast. The arms and ammunition were piled in a dry corner. Fortunately
the travelers were well armed with carbines and revolvers.
A holding anchor was also put on board in case John should be unable to
make the land in one tide, and would have to seek moorings.
At ten o’clock the tide turned. The breeze blew gently from the northwest,
and a slight swell rocked the frail craft.
“Are we ready?” asked John.
“All ready, captain,” answered Wilson.
“All aboard!” cried John.
Lady Helena and Mary Grant descended by a rope ladder, and took their
station at the foot of the mast on the cases of provisions, their companions
near them. Wilson took the helm. John stood by the tackle, and Mulrady cut
the line which held the raft to the ship’s side.
The sail was spread, and the frail structure commenced its progress toward
the land, aided by wind and tide. The coast was about nine miles off, a
distance that a boat with good oars would have accomplished in three hours.
But with a raft allowance must be made. If the wind held, they might reach the
land in one tide. But if the breeze died away, the ebb would carry them away
from the shore, and they would be compelled to anchor and wait for the next
tide, a serious consideration, and one that filled John Mangles with anxiety.
Still he hoped to succeed. The wind freshened. The tide had turned at ten
o’clock, and by three they must either make the land or anchor to save
themselves from being carried out to sea. They made a good start. Little by
little the black line of the reefs and the yellow banks of sand disappeared
under the swelling tide. Extreme watchfulness and perfect skill were necessary
to avoid these submerged rocks, and steer a bark that did not readily answer to
the helm, and that constantly broke off.
At noon they were still five miles from shore. A tolerably clear sky
allowed them to make out the principal features of the land. In the northeast
rose a mountain about 2,300 feet high, whose sharply defined outline was
exactly like the grinning face of a monkey turned toward the sky. It was
Pirongia, which the map gave as exactly on the 38th parallel.
At half-past twelve, Paganel remarked that all the rocks had disappeared
under the rising tide.
“All but one,” answered Lady Helena.
“Which, Madam?” asked Paganel.
“There,” replied she, pointing to a black speck a mile off.
“Yes, indeed,” said Paganel. “Let us try to ascertain its position, so as not
to get too near it, for the sea will soon conceal it.”
“It is exactly in a line with the northern slope of the mountain,” said John
Mangles. “Wilson, mind you give it a wide berth.”
“Yes, captain,” answered the sailor, throwing his whole weight on the great
oar that steered the raft.
In half an hour they had made half a mile. But, strange to say, the black
point still rose above the waves.
John looked attentively, and in order to make it out, borrowed Paganel’s
telescope.
“That is no reef,” said he, after a moment; “it is something floating, which
rises and falls with the swell.”
“Is it part of the mast of the MACQUARIE?” asked Lady Helena.
“No,” said Glenarvan, “none of her timbers could have come so far.”
“Stay!” said John Mangles; “I know it! It is the boat.”
“The ship’s boat?” exclaimed Glenarvan.
“Yes, my lord. The ship’s boat, keel up.”
“The unfortunate creatures,” cried Lady Helena, “they have perished!”
“Yes, Madam,” replied John Mangles, “they must have perished, for in the
midst of these breakers in a heavy swell on that pitchy night, they ran to
certain death.”
For a few minutes the passengers were silent. They gazed at the frail craft
as they drew near it. It must evidently have capsized about four miles from the
shore, and not one of the crew could have escaped.
“But this boat may be of use to us,” said Glenarvan.
“That is true,” answered John Mangles. “Keep her up, Wilson.”
The direction was slightly changed, but the breeze fell gradually, and it
was two hours before they reached the boat.
Mulrady, stationed forward, fended off the blow, and the yawl was drawn
alongside.
“Empty?” asked John Mangles.
“Yes, captain,” answered the sailor, “the boat is empty, and all its seams
are open. It is of no use to us.”
“No use at all?” said McNabbs.
“None at all,” said John Mangles.
“It is good for nothing but to burn.”
“I regret it,” said Paganel, “for the yawl might have taken us to Auckland.”
“We must bear our fate, Monsieur Paganel,” replied John Mangles. “But,
for my part, in such a stormy sea I prefer our raft to that crazy boat. A very
slight shock would be enough to break her up. Therefore, my lord, we have
nothing to detain us further.”
“As you think best, John.”
“On then, Wilson,” said John, “and bear straight for the land.”
There was still an hour before the turn of the tide. In that time they might
make two miles. But the wind soon fell almost entirely, and the raft became
nearly motionless, and soon began to drift to seaward under the influence of
the ebb-tide.
John did not hesitate a moment.
“Let go the anchor,” said he.
Mulrady, who stood to execute this order, let go the anchor in five fathoms
water. The raft backed about two fathoms on the line, which was then at full
stretch. The sail was taken in, and everything made snug for a tedious period
of inaction.
The returning tide would not occur till nine o’clock in the evening; and as
John Mangles did not care to go on in the dark, the anchorage was for the
night, or at least till five o’clock in the morning, land being in sight at a
distance of less than three miles.
A considerable swell raised the waves, and seemed to set in continuously
toward the coast, and perceiving this, Glenarvan asked John why he did not
take advantage of this swell to get nearer to the land.
“Your Lordship is deceived by an optical illusion,” said the young captain.
“Although the swell seems to carry the waves landward, it does not really
move at all. It is mere undulating molecular motion, nothing more. Throw a
piece of wood overboard and you will see that it will remain quite stationary
except as the tide affects it. There is nothing for it but patience.”
“And dinner,” said the Major.
Olbinett unpacked some dried meat and a dozen biscuits. The steward
blushed as he proffered the meager bill of fare. But it was received with a
good grace, even by the ladies, who, however, had not much appetite, owing
to the violent motion.
This motion, produced by the jerking of the raft on the cable, while she lay
head on to the sea, was very severe and fatiguing. The blows of the short,
tumbling seas were as severe as if she had been striking on a submerged rock.
Sometimes it was hard to believe that she was not aground. The cable strained
violently, and every half hour John had to take in a fathom to ease it. Without
this precaution it would certainly have given way, and the raft must have
drifted to destruction.
John’s anxiety may easily be understood. His cable might break, or his
anchor lose its hold, and in either case the danger was imminent.
Night drew on; the sun’s disc, enlarged by refraction, was dipping bloodred below the horizon. The distant waves glittered in the west, and sparkled
like sheets of liquid silver. Nothing was to be seen in that direction but sky and
water, except one sharply-defined object, the hull of the MACQUARIE
motionless on her rocky bed.
The short twilight postponed the darkness only by a few minutes, and soon
the coast outline, which bounded the view on the east and north, was lost in
darkness.
The shipwrecked party were in an agonizing situation on their narrow raft,
and overtaken by the shades of night.
Some of the party fell into a troubled sleep, a prey to evil dreams; others
could not close an eye. When the day dawned, the whole party were worn out
with fatigue.
With the rising tide the wind blew again toward the land. It was six o’clock
in the morning, and there was no time to lose. John arranged everything for
resuming their voyage, and then he ordered the anchor to be weighed. But the
anchor flukes had been so imbedded in the sand by the repeated jerks of the
cable, that without a windlass it was impossible to detach it, even with the
tackle which Wilson had improvised.
Half an hour was lost in vain efforts. John, impatient of delay, cut the rope,
thus sacrificing his anchor, and also the possibility of anchoring again if this
tide failed to carry them to land. But he decided that further delay was not to
be thought of, and an ax-blow committed the raft to the mercy of the wind,
assisted by a current of two knots an hour.
The sail was spread. They drifted slowly toward the land, which rose in
gray, hazy masses, on a background of sky illumined by the rising sun. The
reef was dexterously avoided and doubled, but with the fitful breeze the raft
could not get near the shore. What toil and pain to reach a coast so full of
danger when attained.
At nine o’clock, the land was less than a mile off. It was a steeply-shelving
shore, fringed with breakers; a practicable landing-place had to be discovered.
Gradually the breeze grew fainter, and then ceased entirely. The sail
flapped idly against the mast, and John had it furled. The tide alone carried the
raft to the shore, but steering had become impossible, and its passage was
impeded by immense bands of FUCUS.
At ten o’clock John found himself almost at a stand-still, not three cables’
lengths from the shore. Having lost their anchor, they were at the mercy of the
ebb-tide.
John clenched his hands; he was racked with anxiety, and cast frenzied
glances toward this inaccessible shore.
In the midst of his perplexities, a shock was felt. The raft stood still. It had
landed on a sand-bank, twenty-five fathoms from the coast.
Glenarvan, Robert, Wilson, and Mulrady, jumped into the water. The raft
was firmly moored to the nearest rocks. The ladies were carried to land
without wetting a fold of their dresses, and soon the whole party, with their
arms and provisions, were finally landed on these much dreaded New Zealand
shores.
CHAPTER VII THE MAORI WAR
Glenarvan would have liked to start without an hour’s delay, and follow
the coast to Auckland. But since the morning heavy clouds had been
gathering, and toward eleven o’clock, after the landing was effected, the
vapors condensed into violent rain, so that instead of starting they had to look
for shelter.
Wilson was fortunate enough to discover what just suited their wants: a
grotto hollowed out by the sea in the basaltic rocks. Here the travelers took
shelter with their arms and provisions. In the cave they found a ready-garnered
store of dried sea-weed, which formed a convenient couch; for fire, they
lighted some wood near the mouth of the cavern, and dried themselves as well
as they could.
John hoped that the duration of this deluge of rain would be in an inverse
ratio to its violence, but he was doomed to disappointment. Hours passed
without any abatement of its fury. Toward noon the wind freshened, and
increased the force of the storm. The most patient of men would have rebelled
at such an untoward incident; but what could be done; without any vehicle,
they could not brave such a tempest; and, after all, unless the natives appeared
on the scene, a delay of twelve hours was not so much consequence, as the
journey to Auckland was only a matter of a few days. During this involuntary
halt, the conversation turned on the incidents of the New Zealand war. But to
understand and appreciate the critical position into which these MACQUARIE
passengers were thrown, something ought to be known of the history of the
struggle which had deluged the island of Ika-na-Mani with blood.
Since the arrival of Abel Tasman in Cook’s Strait, on the 16th of
December, 1642, though the New Zealanders had often been visited by
European vessels, they had maintained their liberty in their several islands. No
European power had thought of taking possession of this archipelago, which
commands the whole Pacific Ocean. The missionaries stationed at various
points were the sole channels of Christian civilization. Some of them,
especially the Anglicans, prepared the minds of the New Zealand chiefs for
submitting to the English yoke. It was cleverly managed, and these chiefs were
influenced to sign a letter addressed to Queen Victoria to ask her protection.
But the most clearsighted of them saw the folly of this step; and one of them,
after having affixed his tattoo-mark to the letter by way of signature, uttered
these prophetic words: “We have lost our country! henceforth it is not ours;
soon the stranger will come and take it, and we shall be his slaves.”
And so it was; on January 29, 1840, the English corvette HERALD arrived
to claim possession.
From the year 1840, till the day the DUNCAN left the Clyde, nothing had
happened here that Paganel did not know and he was ready to impart his
information to his companions.
“Madam,” said he, in answer to Lady Helena’s questions, “I must repeat
what I had occasion to remark before, that the New Zealanders are a
courageous people, who yielded for a moment, but afterward fought foot to
foot against the English invaders. The Maori tribes are organized like the old
clans of Scotland. They are so many great families owning a chief, who is very
jealous of his prerogative. The men of this race are proud and brave, one tribe
tall, with straight hair, like the Maltese, or the Jews of Bagdad; the other
smaller, thickset like mulattoes, but robust, haughty, and warlike. They had a
famous chief, named Hihi, a real Vercingetorix, so that you need not be
astonished that the war with the English has become chronic in the Northern
Island, for in it is the famous tribe of the Waikatos, who defend their lands
under the leadership of William Thompson.”
“But,” said John Mangles, “are not the English in possession of the
principal points in New Zealand?”
“Certainly, dear John,” replied Paganel. “After Captain Hobson took
formal possession, and became governor, nine colonies were founded at
various times between 1840 and 1862, in the most favorable situations. These
formed the nucleus of nine provinces, four in the North Island and five in the
southern island, with a total population of 184,346 inhabitants on the 30th of
June, 1864.”
“But what about this interminable war?” asked John Mangles.
“Well,” said Paganel, “six long months have gone by since we left Europe,
and I cannot say what may have happened during that time, with the exception
of a few facts which I gathered from the newspapers of Maryborough and
Seymour during our Australian journey. At that time the fighting was very
lively in the Northern Island.”
“And when did the war commence?” asked Mary Grant.
“Recommence, you mean, my dear young lady,” replied Paganel; “for
there was an insurrection so far back as 1845. The present war began toward
the close of 1863; but long before that date the Maories were occupied in
making preparations to shake off the English yoke. The national party among
the natives carried on an active propaganda for the election of a Maori ruler.
The object was to make old Potatau king, and to fix as the capital of the new
kingdom his village, which lay between the Waikato and Waipa Rivers.
Potatau was an old man, remarkable rather for cunning than bravery; but he
had a Prime Minister who was both intelligent and energetic, a descendant of
the Ngatihahuas, who occupied the isthmus before the arrival of the strangers.
This minister, William Thompson, became the soul of the War of
Independence, and organized the Maori troops, with great skill. Under this
guidance a Taranaki chief gathered the scattered tribes around the same flag; a
Waikato chief formed a ‘Land League,’ intended to prevent the natives from
selling their land to the English Government, and warlike feasts were held just
as in civilized countries on the verge of revolution. The English newspapers
began to notice these alarming symptoms, and the government became
seriously disturbed at these ‘Land League’ proceedings. In short, the train was
laid, and the mine was ready to explode. Nothing was wanted but the spark, or
rather the shock of rival interests to produce the spark.
“This shock took place in 1860, in the Taranaki province on the southwest
coast of Ika-na-Mani. A native had six hundred acres of land in the
neighborhood of New Plymouth. He sold them to the English Government; but
when the surveyor came to measure the purchased land, the chief Kingi
protested, and by the month of March he had made the six hundred acres in
question into a fortified camp, surrounded with high palisades. Some days
after Colonel Gold carried this fortress at the head of his troops, and that day
heard the first shot fired of the native war.”
“Have the rebels been successful up to this time?”
“Yes, Madam, and the English themselves have often been compelled to
admire the courage and bravery of the New Zealanders. Their mode of warfare
is of the guerilla type; they form skirmishing parties, come down in small
detachments, and pillage the colonists’ homes. General Cameron had no easy
time in the campaigns, during which every bush had to be searched. In 1863,
after a long and sanguinary struggle, the Maories were entrenched in strong
and fortified position on the Upper Waikato, at the end of a chain of steep
hills, and covered by three miles of forts. The native prophets called on all the
Maori population to defend the soil, and promised the extermination of the
pakekas, or white men. General Cameron had three thousand volunteers at his
disposal, and they gave no quarter to the Maories after the barbarous murder
of Captain Sprent. Several bloody engagements took place; in some instances
the fighting lasted twelve hours before the Maories yielded to the English
cannonade. The heart of the army was the fierce Waikato tribe under William
Thompson. This native general commanded at the outset 2,500 warriors,
afterward increased to 8,000. The men of Shongi and Heki, two powerful
chiefs, came to his assistance. The women took their part in the most trying
labors of this patriotic war. But right has not always might. After severe
struggles General Cameron succeeded in subduing the Waikato district, but
empty and depopulated, for the Maories escaped in all directions. Some
wonderful exploits were related. Four hundred Maories who were shut up in
the fortress of Orakau, besieged by 1,000 English, under Brigadier-General
Carey, without water or provisions, refused to surrender, but one day at noon
cut their way through the then decimated 40th Regiment, and escaped to the
marshes.”
“But,” asked John Mangles, “did the submission of the Waikato district put
an end to this sanguinary war?”
“No, my friend,” replied Paganel. “The English resolved to march on
Taranaki province and besiege Mataitawa, William Thompson’s fortress. But
they did not carry it without great loss. Just as I was leaving Paris, I heard that
the Governor and the General had accepted the submission of the Tauranga
tribes, and left them in possession of three-fourths of their lands. It was also
rumored that the principal chief of the rebellion, William Thompson, was
inclined to surrender, but the Australian papers have not confirmed this, but
rather the contrary, and I should not be surprised to find that at this moment
the war is going on with renewed vigor.”
“Then, according to you, Paganel,” said Glenarvan, “this struggle is still
going on in the provinces of Auckland and Taranaki?”
“I think so.”
“This very province where the MACQUARIE’S wreck has deposited us.”
“Exactly. We have landed a few miles above Kawhia harbor, where the
Maori flag is probably still floating.”
“Then our most prudent course would be to keep toward the north,”
remarked Glenarvan.
“By far the most prudent,” said Paganel. “The New Zealanders are
incensed against Europeans, and especially against the English. Therefore let
us avoid falling into their hands.”
“We might have the good fortune to fall in with a detachment of European
troops,” said Lady Helena.
“We may, Madam,” replied the geographer; “but I do not expect it.
Detached parties do not like to go far into the country, where the smallest
tussock, the thinnest brushwood, may conceal an accomplished marksman. I
don’t fancy we shall pick up an escort of the 40th Regiment. But there are
mission-stations on this west coast, and we shall be able to make them our
halting-places till we get to Auckland.”
CHAPTER VIII ON THE ROAD TO AUCKLAND
On the 7th of February, at six o’clock in the morning, the signal for
departure was given by Glenarvan. During the night the rain had ceased. The
sky was veiled with light gray clouds, which moderated the heat of the sun,
and allowed the travelers to venture on a journey by day.
Paganel had measured on the map a distance of eighty miles between Point
Kawhia and Auckland; it was an eight days’ journey if they made ten miles a
day. But instead of following the windings of the coast, he thought it better to
make for a point thirty miles off, at the confluence of the Waikato and the
Waipa, at the village of Ngarnavahia. The “overland track” passes that point,
and is rather a path than a road, practicable for the vehicles which go almost
across the island, from Napier, in Hawke’s Bay, to Auckland. From this village
it would be easy to reach Drury, and there they could rest in an excellent hotel,
highly recommended by Dr. Hochstetter.
The travelers, each carrying a share of the provisions, commenced to
follow the shore of Aotea Bay. From prudential motives they did not allow
themselves to straggle, and by instinct they kept a look-out over the undulating
plains to the eastward, ready with their loaded carbines. Paganel, map in hand,
took a professional pleasure in verifying the minutest details.
The country looked like an immense prairie which faded into distance, and
promised an easy walk. But the travelers were undeceived when they came to
the edge of this verdant plain. The grass gave way to a low scrub of small
bushes bearing little white flowers, mixed with those innumerable tall ferns
with which the lands of New Zealand abound. They had to cut a path across
the plain, through these woody stems, and this was a matter of some difficulty,
but at eight o’clock in the evening the first slopes of the Hakarihoata Ranges
were turned, and the party camped immediately. After a fourteen miles’ march,
they might well think of resting.
Neither wagon or tent being available, they sought repose beneath some
magnificent Norfolk Island pines. They had plenty of rugs which make good
beds. Glenarvan took every possible precaution for the night. His companions
and he, well armed, were to watch in turns, two and two, till daybreak. No
fires were lighted. Barriers of fire are a potent preservation from wild beasts,
but New Zealand has neither tiger, nor lion, nor bear, nor any wild animal, but
the Maori adequately fills their place, and a fire would only have served to
attract this two-footed jaguar.
The night passed pleasantly with the exception of the attack of the sandflies, called by the natives, “ngamu,” and the visit of the audacious family of
rats, who exercised their teeth on the provisions.
Next day, on the 8th of February, Paganel rose more sanguine, and almost
reconciled to the country. The Maories, whom he particularly dreaded, had not
yet appeared, and these ferocious cannibals had not molested him even in his
dreams. “I begin to think that our little journey will end favorably. This
evening we shall reach the confluence of the Waipa and Waikato, and after that
there is not much chance of meeting natives on the way to Auckland.”
“How far is it now,” said Glenarvan, “to the confluence of the Waipa and
Waikato?”
“Fifteen miles; just about what we did yesterday.”
“But we shall be terribly delayed if this interminable scrub continues to
obstruct our path.”
“No,” said Paganel, “we shall follow the banks of the Waipa, and then we
shall have no obstacle, but on the contrary, a very easy road.”
“Well, then,” said Glenarvan, seeing the ladies ready, “let us make a start.”
During the early part of the day, the thick brushwood seriously impeded
their progress. Neither wagon nor horses could have passed where travelers
passed, so that their Australian vehicle was but slightly regretted. Until
practicable wagon roads are cut through these forests of scrub, New Zealand
will only be accessible to foot passengers. The ferns, whose name is legion,
concur with the Maories in keeping strangers off the lands.
The little party overcame many obstacles in crossing the plains in which
the Hakarihoata Ranges rise. But before noon they reached the banks of the
Waipa, and followed the northward course of the river.
The Major and Robert, without leaving their companions, shot some snipe
and partridge under the low shrubs of the plain. Olbinett, to save time, plucked
the birds as he went along.
Paganel was less absorbed by the culinary importance of the game than by
the desire of obtaining some bird peculiar to New Zealand. His curiosity as a
naturalist overcame his hunger as a traveler. He called to mind the peculiarities
of the “tui” of the natives, sometimes called the mocking-bird from its
incessant chuckle, and sometimes “the parson,” in allusion to the white cravat
it wears over its black, cassock-like plumage.
“The tui,” said Paganel to the Major, “grows so fat during the Winter that it
makes him ill, and prevents him from flying. Then he tears his breast with his
beak, to relieve himself of his fat, and so becomes lighter. Does not that seem
to you singular, McNabbs?”
“So singular that I don’t believe a word of it,” replied the Major.
Paganel, to his great regret, could not find a single specimen, or he might
have shown the incredulous Major the bloody scars on the breast. But he was
more fortunate with a strange animal which, hunted by men, cats and dogs, has
fled toward the unoccupied country, and is fast disappearing from the fauna of
New Zealand. Robert, searching like a ferret, came upon a nest made of
interwoven roots, and in it a pair of birds destitute of wings and tail, with four
toes, a long snipe-like beak, and a covering of white feathers over the whole
body, singular creatures, which seemed to connect the oviparous tribes with
the mammifers.
It was the New Zealand “kiwi,” the Apteryx australis of naturalists, which
lives with equal satisfaction on larvae, insects, worms or seeds. This bird is
peculiar to the country. It has been introduced into very few of the zoological
collections of Europe. Its graceless shape and comical motions have always
attracted the notice of travelers, and during the great exploration of the
Astrolabe and the Zelee, Dumont d’Urville was principally charged by the
Academy of Sciences to bring back a specimen of these singular birds. But in
spite of rewards offered to the natives, he could not obtain a single specimen.
Paganel, who was elated at such a piece of luck, tied the two birds
together, and carried them along with the intention of presenting them to the
Jardin des Plantes, in Paris. “Presented by M. Jacques Paganel.” He mentally
saw the flattering inscription on the handsomest cage in the gardens. Sanguine
geographer!
The party pursued their way without fatigue along the banks of the Waipa.
The country was quite deserted; not a trace of natives, nor any track that could
betray the existence of man. The stream was fringed with tall bushes, or glided
along sloping banks, so that nothing obstructed the view of the low range of
hills which closed the eastern end of the valley. With their grotesque shapes,
and their outlines lost in a deceptive haze, they brought to mind giant animals,
worthy of antediluvian times. They might have been a herd of enormous
whales, suddenly turned to stone. These disrupted masses proclaimed their
essentially volcanic character. New Zealand is, in fact, a formation of recent
plutonic origin. Its emergence from the sea is constantly increasing. Some
points are known to have risen six feet in twenty years. Fire still runs across its
center, shakes it, convulses it, and finds an outlet in many places by the
mouths of geysers and the craters of volcanoes.
At four in the afternoon, nine miles had been easily accomplished.
According to the map which Paganel constantly referred to, the confluence of
the Waipa and Waikato ought to be reached about five miles further on, and
there the night halt could be made. Two or three days would then suffice for
the fifty miles which lay between them and the capital; and if Glenarvan
happened to fall in with the mail coach that plies between Hawkes’ Bay and
Auckland twice a month, eight hours would be sufficient.
“Therefore,” said Glenarvan, “we shall be obliged to camp during the night
once more.”
“Yes,” said Paganel, “but I hope for the last time.”
“I am very glad to think so, for it is very trying for Lady Helena and Mary
Grant.”
“And they never utter a murmur,” added John Mangles. “But I think I
heard you mention a village at the confluence of these rivers.”
“Yes,” said the geographer, “here it is, marked on Johnston’s map. It is
Ngarnavahia, two miles below the junction.”
“Well, could we not stay there for the night? Lady Helena and Miss Grant
would not grudge two miles more to find a hotel even of a humble character.”
“A hotel!” cried Paganel, “a hotel in a Maori village! you would not find
an inn, not a tavern! This village will be a mere cluster of huts, and so far from
seeking rest there, my advice is that you give it a wide berth.”
“Your old fears, Paganel!” retorted Glenarvan.
“My dear Lord, where Maories are concerned, distrust is safer than
confidence. I do not know on what terms they are with the English, whether
the insurrection is suppressed or successful, or whether indeed the war may
not be going on with full vigor. Modesty apart, people like us would be a
prize, and I must say, I would rather forego a taste of Maori hospitality. I think
it certainly more prudent to avoid this village of Ngarnavahia, to skirt it at a
distance, so as to avoid all encounters with the natives. When we reach Drury
it will be another thing, and there our brave ladies will be able to recruit their
strength at their leisure.”
This advice prevailed. Lady Helena preferred to pass another night in the
open air, and not to expose her companions to danger. Neither Mary Grant or
she wished to halt, and they continued their march along the river.
Two hours later, the first shades of evening began to fall. The sun, before
disappearing below the western horizon, darted some bright rays through an
opening in the clouds. The distant eastern summits were empurpled with the
parting glories of the day. It was like a flying salute addressed to the way-worn
travelers.
Glenarvan and his friends hastened their steps, they knew how short the
twilight is in this high latitude, and how quickly the night follows it. They
were very anxious to reach the confluence of the two rivers before the
darkness overtook them. But a thick fog rose from the ground, and made it
very difficult to see the way.
Fortunately hearing stood them in the stead of sight; shortly a nearer sound
of water indicated that the confluence was at hand. At eight o’clock the little
troop arrived at the point where the Waipa loses itself in the Waikato, with a
moaning sound of meeting waves.
“There is the Waikato!” cried Paganel, “and the road to Auckland is along
its right bank.”
“We shall see that to-morrow,” said the Major, “Let us camp here. It seems
to me that that dark shadow is that of a little clump of trees grown expressly to
shelter us. Let us have supper and then get some sleep.”
“Supper by all means,” said Paganel, “but no fire; nothing but biscuit and
dried meat. We have reached this spot incognito, let us try and get away in the
same manner. By good luck, the fog is in our favor.”
The clump of trees was reached and all concurred in the wish of the
geographer. The cold supper was eaten without a sound, and presently a
profound sleep overcame the travelers, who were tolerably fatigued with their
fifteen miles’ march.
CHAPTER IX INTRODUCTION TO THE CANNIBALS
The next morning at daybreak a thick fog was clinging to the surface of the
river. A portion of the vapors that saturated the air were condensed by the cold,
and lay as a dense cloud on the water. But the rays of the sun soon broke
through the watery mass and melted it away.
A tongue of land, sharply pointed and bristling with bushes, projected into
the uniting streams. The swifter waters of the Waipa rushed against the current
of the Waikato for a quarter of a mile before they mingled with it; but the calm
and majestic river soon quieted the noisy stream and carried it off quietly in its
course to the Pacific Ocean.
When the vapor disappeared, a boat was seen ascending the current of the
Waikato. It was a canoe seventy feet long, five broad, and three deep; the prow
raised like that of a Venetian gondola, and the whole hollowed out of a trunk
of a kahikatea. A bed of dry fern was laid at the bottom. It was swiftly rowed
by eight oars, and steered with a paddle by a man seated in the stern.
This man was a tall Maori, about forty-five years of age, broad-chested,
muscular, with powerfully developed hands and feet. His prominent and
deeply-furrowed brow, his fierce look, and sinister expression, gave him a
formidable aspect.
Tattooing, or “moko,” as the New Zealanders call it, is a mark of great
distinction. None is worthy of these honorary lines, who has not distinguished
himself in repeated fights. The slaves and the lower class can not obtain this
decoration. Chiefs of high position may be known by the finish and precision
and truth of the design, which sometimes covers their whole bodies with the
figures of animals. Some are found to undergo the painful operation of
“moko” five times. The more illustrious, the more illustrated, is the rule of
New Zealand.
Dumont D’Urville has given some curious details as to this custom. He
justly observes that “moko” is the counterpart of the armorial bearings of
which many families in Europe are so vain. But he remarks that there is this
difference: the armorial bearings of Europe are frequently a proof only of the
merits of the first who bore them, and are no certificate of the merits of his
descendants; while the individual coat-of-arms of the Maori is an irrefragible
proof that it was earned by the display of extraordinary personal courage.
The practice of tattooing, independently of the consideration it procures,
has also a useful aspect. It gives the cutaneous system an increased thickness,
enabling it to resist the inclemency of the season and the incessant attacks of
the mosquito.
As to the chief who was steering the canoe, there could be no mistake. The
sharpened albatross bone used by the Maori tattooer, had five times scored his
countenance. He was in his fifth edition, and betrayed it in his haughty
bearing.
His figure, draped in a large mat woven of “phormium” trimmed with
dogskins, was clothed with a pair of cotton drawers, blood-stained from recent
combats. From the pendant lobe of his ears hung earrings of green jade, and
round his neck a quivering necklace of “pounamous,” a kind of jade stone
sacred among the New Zealanders. At his side lay an English rifle, and a
“patou-patou,” a kind of two-headed ax of an emerald color, and eighteen
inches long. Beside him sat nine armed warriors of inferior rank, ferociouslooking fellows, some of them suffering from recent wounds. They sat quite
motionless, wrapped in their flax mantles. Three savage-looking dogs lay at
their feet. The eight rowers in the prow seemed to be servants or slaves of the
chief. They rowed vigorously, and propelled the boat against the not very rapid
current of the Waikato, with extraordinary velocity.
In the center of this long canoe, with their feet tied together, sat ten
European prisoners closely packed together.
It was Glenarvan and Lady Helena, Mary Grant, Robert, Paganel, the
Major, John Mangles, the steward, and the two sailors.
The night before, the little band had unwittingly, owing to the mist,
encamped in the midst of a numerous party of natives. Toward the middle of
the night they were surprised in their sleep, were made prisoners, and carried
on board the canoe. They had not been ill-treated, so far, but all attempts at
resistance had been vain. Their arms and ammunition were in the hands of the
savages, and they would soon have been targets for their own balls.
They were soon aware, from a few English words used by the natives, that
they were a retreating party of the tribe who had been beaten and decimated by
the English troops, and were on their way back to the Upper Waikato. The
Maori chief, whose principal warriors had been picked off by the soldiers of
the 42nd Regiment, was returning to make a final appeal to the tribes of the
Waikato district, so that he might go to the aid of the indomitable William
Thompson, who was still holding his own against the conquerors. The chief’s
name was “Kai-Koumou,” a name of evil boding in the native language,
meaning “He who eats the limbs of his enemy.” He was bold and brave, but
his cruelty was equally remarkable. No pity was to be expected at his hands.
His name was well known to the English soldiers, and a price had been set on
his head by the governor of New Zealand.
This terrible blow befell Glenarvan at the very moment when he was about
to reach the long-desired haven of Auckland, and so regain his own country;
but no one who looked at his cool, calm features, could have guessed the
anguish he endured. Glenarvan always rose to his misfortunes. He felt that his
part was to be the strength and the example of his wife and companions; that
he was the head and chief; ready to die for the rest if circumstances required it.
He was of a deeply religious turn of mind, and never lost his trust in
Providence nor his belief in the sacred character of his enterprise. In the midst
of this crowning peril he did not give way to any feeling of regret at having
been induced to venture into this country of savages.
His companions were worthy of him; they entered into his lofty views; and
judging by their haughty demeanor, it would scarcely have been supposed that
they were hurrying to the final catastrophe. With one accord, and by
Glenarvan’s advice, they resolved to affect utter indifference before the
natives. It was the only way to impress these ferocious natures. Savages in
general, and particularly the Maories, have a notion of dignity from which
they never derogate. They respect, above all things, coolness and courage.
Glenarvan was aware that by this mode of procedure, he and his companions
would spare themselves needless humiliation.
From the moment of embarking, the natives, who were very taciturn, like
all savages, had scarcely exchanged a word, but from the few sentences they
did utter, Glenarvan felt certain that the English language was familiar to
them. He therefore made up his mind to question the chief on the fate that
awaited them. Addressing himself to Kai-Koumou, he said in a perfectly
unconcerned voice:
“Where are we going, chief?”
Kai-Koumou looked coolly at him and made no answer.
“What are you going to do with us?” pursued Glenarvan.
A sudden gleam flashed into the eyes of Kai-Koumou, and he said in a
deep voice:
“Exchange you, if your own people care to have you; eat you if they
don’t.”
Glenarvan asked no further questions; but hope revived in his heart. He
concluded that some Maori chiefs had fallen into the hands of the English, and
that the natives would try to get them exchanged. So they had a chance of
salvation, and the case was not quite so desperate.
The canoe was speeding rapidly up the river. Paganel, whose excitable
temperament always rebounded from one extreme to the other, had quite
regained his spirits. He consoled himself that the natives were saving them the
trouble of the journey to the English outposts, and that was so much gain. So
he took it quite quietly and followed on the map the course of the Waikato
across the plains and valleys of the province. Lady Helena and Mary Grant,
concealing their alarm, conversed in a low voice with Glenarvan, and the
keenest physiognomists would have failed to see any anxiety in their faces.
The Waikato is the national river in New Zealand. It is to the Maories what
the Rhine is to the Germans, and the Danube to the Slavs. In its course of 200
miles it waters the finest lands of the North Island, from the province of
Wellington to the province of Auckland. It gave its name to all those
indomitable tribes of the river district, which rose en masse against the
invaders.
The waters of this river are still almost strangers to any craft but the native
canoe. The most audacious tourist will scarcely venture to invade these sacred
shores; in fact, the Upper Waikato is sealed against profane Europeans.
Paganel was aware of the feelings of veneration with which the natives
regard this great arterial stream. He knew that the English and German
naturalists had never penetrated further than its junction with the Waipa. He
wondered how far the good pleasure of Kai-Koumou would carry his
captives? He could not have guessed, but for hearing the word “Taupo”
repeatedly uttered between the chief and his warriors. He consulted his map
and saw that “Taupo” was the name of a lake celebrated in geographical
annals, and lying in the most mountainous part of the island, at the southern
extremity of Auckland province. The Waikato passes through this lake and
then flows on for 120 miles.
CHAPTER X A MOMENTOUS INTERVIEW
An unfathomable gulf twenty-five miles long, and twenty miles broad was
produced, but long before historic times, by the falling in of caverns among
the trachytic lavas of the center of the island. And these waters falling from
the surrounding heights have taken possession of this vast basin. The gulf has
become a lake, but it is also an abyss, and no lead-line has yet sounded its
depths.
Such is the wondrous lake of Taupo, lying 1,250 feet above the level of the
sea, and in view of an amphitheater of mountains 2,400 feet high. On the west
are rocky peaks of great size; on the north lofty summits clothed with low
trees; on the east a broad beach with a road track, and covered with pumice
stones, which shimmer through the leafy screen of the bushes; on the southern
side rise volcanic cones behind a forest flat. Such is the majestic frame that
incloses this vast sheet of water whose roaring tempests rival the cyclones of
Ocean.
The whole region boils like an immense cauldron hung over subterranean
fires. The ground vibrates from the agitation of the central furnace. Hot
springs filter out everywhere. The crust of the earth cracks in great rifts like a
cake, too quickly baked.
About a quarter of a mile off, on a craggy spur of the mountain stood a
“pah,” or Maori fortress. The prisoners, whose feet and hands were liberated,
were landed one by one, and conducted into it by the warriors. The path which
led up to the intrenchment, lay across fields of “phormium” and a grove of
beautiful trees, the “kai-kateas” with persistent leaves and red berries;
“dracaenas australis,” the “ti-trees” of the natives, whose crown is a graceful
counterpart of the cabbage-palm, and “huious,” which are used to give a black
dye to cloth. Large doves with metallic sheen on their plumage, and a world of
starlings with reddish carmeles, flew away at the approach of the natives.
After a rather circuitous walk, Glenarvan and his party arrived at the
“pah.”
The fortress was defended by an outer inclosure of strong palisades, fifteen
feet high; a second line of stakes; then a fence composed of osiers, with loopholes, inclosed Verne the inner space, that is the plateau of the “pah,” on
which were erected the Maori buildings, and about forty huts arranged
symmetrically.
When the captives approached they were horror-struck at the sight of the
heads which adorned the posts of the inner circle. Lady Helena and Mary
Grant turned away their eyes more with disgust than with terror. These heads
were those of hostile chiefs who had fallen in battle, and whose bodies had
served to feed the conquerors. The geographer recognized that it was so, from
their eye sockets being hollow and deprived of eye-balls.
Glenarvan and his companions had taken in all this scene at a glance. They
stood near an empty house, waiting the pleasure of the chief, and exposed to
the abuse of a crowd of old crones. This troop of harpies surrounded them,
shaking their fists, howling and vociferating. Some English words that escaped
their coarse mouths left no doubt that they were clamoring for immediate
vengeance.
In the midst of all these cries and threats, Lady Helena, tranquil to all
outward seeming, affected an indifference she was far from feeling. This
courageous woman made heroic efforts to restrain herself, lest she should
disturb Glenarvan’s coolness. Poor Mary Grant felt her heart sink within her,
and John Mangles stood by ready to die in her behalf. His companions bore
the deluge of invectives each according to his disposition; the Major with utter
indifference, Paganel with exasperation that increased every moment.
Glenarvan, to spare Lady Helena the attacks of these witches, walked
straight up to Kai-Koumou, and pointing to the hideous group:
“Send them away,” said he.
The Maori chief stared fixedly at his prisoner without speaking; and then,
with a nod, he silenced the noisy horde. Glenarvan bowed, as a sign of thanks,
and went slowly back to his place.
At this moment a hundred Maories were assembled in the “pah,” old men,
full grown men, youths; the former were calm, but gloomy, awaiting the
orders of Kai-Koumou; the others gave themselves up to the most violent
sorrow, bewailing their parents and friends who had fallen in the late
engagements.
Kai-Koumou was the only one of all the chiefs that obeyed the call of
William Thompson, who had returned to the lake district, and he was the first
to announce to his tribe the defeat of the national insurrection, beaten on the
plains of the lower Waikato. Of the two hundred warriors who, under his
orders, hastened to the defence of the soil, one hundred and fifty were missing
on his return. Allowing for a number being made prisoners by the invaders,
how many must be lying on the field of battle, never to return to the country of
their ancestors!
This was the secret of the outburst of grief with which the tribe saluted the
arrival of Kai-Koumou. Up to that moment nothing had been known of the last
defeat, and the fatal news fell on them like a thunder clap.
Among the savages, sorrow is always manifested by physical signs; the
parents and friends of deceased warriors, the women especially, lacerated their
faces and shoulders with sharpened shells. The blood spurted out and blended
with their tears. Deep wounds denoted great despair. The unhappy Maories,
bleeding and excited, were hideous to look upon.
There was another serious element in their grief. Not only had they lost the
relative or friend they mourned, but his bones would be missing in the family
mausoleum. In the Maori religion the possession of these relics is regarded as
indispensable to the destinies of the future life; not the perishable flesh, but the
bones, which are collected with the greatest care, cleaned, scraped, polished,
even varnished, and then deposited in the “oudoupa,” that is the “house of
glory.” These tombs are adorned with wooden statues, representing with
perfect exactness the tattoo of the deceased. But now their tombs would be left
empty, the religious rites would be unsolemnized, and the bones that escaped
the teeth of the wild dog would whiten without burial on the field of battle.
Then the sorrowful chorus redoubled. The menaces of the women were
intensified by the imprecations of the men against the Europeans. Abusive
epithets were lavished, the accompanying gestures became more violent. The
howl was about to end in brutal action.
Kai-Koumou, fearing that he might be overpowered by the fanatics of his
tribe, conducted his prisoners to a sacred place, on an abruptly raised plateau
at the other end of the “pah.” This hut rested against a mound elevated a
hundred feet above it, which formed the steep outer buttress of the
entrenchment. In this “Ware-Atoua,” sacred house, the priests or arikis taught
the Maories about a Triune God, father, son, and bird, or spirit. The large, well
constructed hut, contained the sacred and choice food which Maoui-RangaRangui eats by the mouths of his priests.
In this place, and safe for the moment from the frenzied natives, the
captives lay down on the flax mats. Lady Helena was quite exhausted, her
moral energies prostrate, and she fell helpless into her husband’s arms.
Glenarvan pressed her to his bosom and said:
“Courage, my dear Helena; Heaven will not forsake us!”
Robert was scarcely in when he jumped on Wilson’s shoulders, and
squeezed his head through a crevice left between the roof and the walls, from
which chaplets of amulets were hung. From that elevation he could see the
whole extent of the “pah,” and as far as Kai-Koumou’s house.
“They are all crowding round the chief,” said he softly. “They are throwing
their arms about. . . . They are howling. . . . . Kai-Koumou is trying to speak.”
Then he was silent for a few minutes.
“Kai-Koumou is speaking. . . . The savages are quieter. . . . . They are
listening. . . . .”
“Evidently,” said the Major, “this chief has a personal interest in protecting
us. He wants to exchange his prisoners for some chiefs of his tribe! But will
his warriors consent?”
“Yes! . . . They are listening. . . . . They have dispersed, some are gone into
their huts. . . . The others have left the intrenchment.”
“Are you sure?” said the Major.
“Yes, Mr. McNabbs,” replied Robert, “Kai-Koumou is left alone with the
warriors of his canoe. . . . . Oh! one of them is coming up here. . . . .”
“Come down, Robert,” said Glenarvan.
At this moment, Lady Helena who had risen, seized her husband’s arm.
“Edward,” she said in a resolute tone, “neither Mary Grant nor I must fall
into the hands of these savages alive!”
And so saying, she handed Glenarvan a loaded revolver.
“Fire-arm!” exclaimed Glenarvan, with flashing eyes.
“Yes! the Maories do not search their prisoners. But, Edward, this is for us,
not for them.”
Glenarvan slipped the revolver under his coat; at the same moment the mat
at the entrance was raised, and a native entered.
He motioned to the prisoners to follow him. Glenarvan and the rest walked
across the “pah” and stopped before Kai-Koumou. He was surrounded by the
principal warriors of his tribe, and among them the Maori whose canoe joined
that of the Kai-Koumou at the confluence of Pohain-henna, on the Waikato.
He was a man about forty years of age, powerfully built and of fierce and cruel
aspect. His name was Kara-Tete, meaning “the irascible” in the native tongue.
Kai-Koumou treated him with a certain tone of respect, and by the fineness of
his tattoo, it was easy to perceive that Kara-Tete held a lofty position in the
tribe, but a keen observer would have guessed the feeling of rivalry that
existed between these two chiefs. The Major observed that the influence of
Kara-Tete gave umbrage to Kai-Koumou. They both ruled the Waikato tribes,
and were equal in authority. During this interview Kai-Koumou smiled, but his
eyes betrayed a deep-seated enmity.
Kai-Koumou interrogated Glenarvan.
“You are English?” said he.
“Yes,” replied Glenarvan, unhesitatingly, as his nationality would facilitate
the exchange.
“And your companions?” said Kai-Koumou.
“My companions are English like myself. We are shipwrecked travelers,
but it may be important to state that we have taken no part in the war.”
“That matters little!” was the brutal answer of Kara-Tete. “Every
Englishman is an enemy. Your people invaded our island! They robbed our
fields! they burned our villages!”
“They were wrong!” said Glenarvan, quietly. “I say so, because I think it,
not because I am in your power.”
“Listen,” said Kai-Koumou, “the Tohonga, the chief priest of Noui-Atoua
has fallen into the hands of your brethren; he is a prisoner among the Pakekas.
Our deity has commanded us to ransom him. For my own part, I would rather
have torn out your heart, I would have stuck your head, and those of your
companions, on the posts of that palisade. But Noui-Atoua has spoken.”
As he uttered these words, Kai-Koumou, who till now had been quite
unmoved, trembled with rage, and his features expressed intense ferocity.
Then after a few minutes’ interval he proceeded more calmly.
“Do you think the English will exchange you for our Tohonga?”
Glenarvan hesitated, all the while watching the Maori chief.
“I do not know,” said he, after a moment of silence.
“Speak,” returned Kai-Koumou, “is your life worth that of our Tohonga?”
“No,” replied Glenarvan. “I am neither a chief nor a priest among my own
people.”
Paganel, petrified at this reply, looked at Glenarvan in amazement. KaiKoumou appeared equally astonished.
“You doubt it then?” said he.
“I do not know,” replied Glenarvan.
“Your people will not accept you as an exchange for Tohonga?”
“Me alone? no,” repeated Glenarvan. “All of us perhaps they might.”
“Our Maori custom,” replied Kai-Koumou, “is head for head.”
“Offer first these ladies in exchange for your priest,” said Glenarvan,
pointing to Lady Helena and Mary Grant.
Lady Helena was about to interrupt him. But the Major held her back.
“Those two ladies,” continued Glenarvan, bowing respectfully toward
Lady Helena and Mary Grant, “are personages of rank in their own country.”
The warrior gazed coldly at his prisoner. An evil smile relaxed his lips for
a moment; then he controlled himself, and in a voice of ill-concealed anger:
“Do you hope to deceive Kai-Koumou with lying words, accursed Pakeka?
Can not the eyes of Kai-Koumou read hearts?”
And pointing to Lady Helena: “That is your wife?” he said.
“No! mine!” exclaimed Kara-Tete.
And then pushing his prisoners aside, he laid his hand on the shoulder of
Lady Helena, who turned pale at his touch.
“Edward!” cried the unfortunate woman in terror.
Glenarvan, without a word, raised his arm, a shot! and Kara-Tete fell at his
feet.
The sound brought a crowd of natives to the spot. A hundred arms were
ready, and Glenarvan’s revolver was snatched from him.
Kai-Koumou glanced at Glenarvan with a curious expression: then with
one hand protecting Glenarvan, with the other he waved off the crowd who
were rushing on the party.
At last his voice was heard above the tumult.
“Taboo! Taboo!” he shouted.
At that word the crowd stood still before Glenarvan and his companions,
who for the time were preserved by a supernatural influence.
A few minutes after they were re-conducted to Ware-Atoua, which was
their prison. But Robert Grant and Paganel were not with them.
CHAPTER XI THE CHIEF’S FUNERAL
Kai-Koumou, as frequently happens among the Maories, joined the title of
ariki to that of tribal chief. He was invested with the dignity of priest, and, as
such, he had the power to throw over persons or things the superstitious
protection of the “taboo.”
The “taboo,” which is common to all the Polynesian races, has the primary
effect of isolating the “tabooed” person and preventing the use of “tabooed”
things. According to the Maori doctrine, anyone who laid sacrilegious hands
on what had been declared “taboo,” would be punished with death by the
insulted deity, and even if the god delayed the vindication of his power, the
priests took care to accelerate his vengeance.
By the chiefs, the “taboo” is made a political engine, except in some cases,
for domestic reasons. For instance, a native is tabooed for several days when
his hair is cut; when he is tattooed; when he is building a canoe, or a house;
when he is seriously ill, and when he is dead. If excessive consumption
threatens to exterminate the fish of a river, or ruin the early crop of sweet
potatoes, these things are put under the protection of the taboo. If a chief
wishes to clear his house of hangers-on, he taboos it; if an English trader
displeases him he is tabooed. His interdict has the effect of the old royal
“veto.”
If an object is tabooed, no one can touch it with impunity. When a native is
under the interdict, certain aliments are denied him for a prescribed period. If
he is relieved, as regards the severe diet, his slaves feed him with the viands he
is forbidden to touch with his hands; if he is poor and has no slaves, he has to
take up the food with his mouth, like an animal.
In short, the most trifling acts of the Maories are directed and modified by
this singular custom, the deity is brought into constant contact with their daily
life. The taboo has the same weight as a law; or rather, the code of the
Maories, indisputable and undisputed, is comprised in the frequent
applications of the taboo.
As to the prisoners confined in the Ware-Atoua, it was an arbitrary taboo
which had saved them from the fury of the tribe. Some of the natives, friends
and partisans of Kai-Koumou, desisted at once on hearing their chief’s voice,
and protected the captives from the rest.
Glenarvan cherished no illusive hopes as to his own fate; nothing but his
death could atone for the murder of a chief, and among these people death was
only the concluding act of a martyrdom of torture. Glenarvan, therefore, was
fully prepared to pay the penalty of the righteous indignation that nerved his
arm, but he hoped that the wrath of Kai-Koumou would not extend beyond
himself.
What a night he and his companions passed! Who could picture their
agonies or measure their sufferings? Robert and Paganel had not been restored
to them, but their fate was no doubtful matter. They were too surely the first
victims of the frenzied natives. Even McNabbs, who was always sanguine, had
abandoned hope. John Mangles was nearly frantic at the sight of Mary Grant’s
despair at being separated from her brother. Glenarvan pondered over the
terrible request of Lady Helena, who preferred dying by his hand to submitting
to torture and slavery. How was he to summon the terrible courage!
“And Mary? who has a right to strike her dead?” thought John, whose
heart was broken.
Escape was clearly impossible. Ten warriors, armed to the teeth, kept
watch at the door of Ware-Atoua.
The morning of February 13th arrived. No communication had taken place
between the natives and the “tabooed” prisoners. A limited supply of
provisions was in the house, which the unhappy inmates scarcely touched.
Misery deadened the pangs of hunger. The day passed without change, and
without hope; the funeral ceremonies of the dead chief would doubtless be the
signal for their execution.
Although Glenarvan did not conceal from himself the probability that KaiKoumou had given up all idea of exchange, the Major still cherished a spark
of hope.
“Who knows,” said he, as he reminded Glenarvan of the effect produced
on the chief by the death of Kara-Tete—“who knows but that Kai-Koumou, in
his heart, is very much obliged to you?”
But even McNabbs’ remarks failed to awaken hope in Glenarvan’s mind.
The next day passed without any appearance of preparation for their
punishment; and this was the reason of the delay.
The Maories believe that for three days after death the soul inhabits the
body, and therefore, for three times twenty-four hours, the corpse remains
unburied. This custom was rigorously observed. Till February 15th the “pah”
was deserted.
John Mangles, hoisted on Wilson’s shoulders, frequently reconnoitered the
outer defences. Not a single native was visible; only the watchful sentinels
relieving guard at the door of the Ware-Atoua.
But on the third day the huts opened; all the savages, men, women, and
children, in all several hundred Maories, assembled in the “pah,” silent and
calm.
Kai-Koumou came out of his house, and surrounded by the principal chiefs
of his tribe, he took his stand on a mound some feet above the level, in the
center of the enclosure. The crowd of natives formed in a half circle some
distance off, in dead silence.
At a sign from Kai-Koumou, a warrior bent his steps toward Ware-Atoua.
“Remember,” said Lady Helena to her husband. Glenarvan pressed her to
his heart, and Mary Grant went closer to John Mangles, and said hurriedly:
“Lord and Lady Glenarvan cannot but think if a wife may claim death at
her husband’s hands, to escape a shameful life, a betrothed wife may claim
death at the hands of her betrothed husband, to escape the same fate. John! at
this last moment I ask you, have we not long been betrothed to each other in
our secret hearts? May I rely on you, as Lady Helena relies on Lord
Glenarvan?”
“Mary!” cried the young captain in his despair. “Ah! dear Mary—”
The mat was lifted, and the captives led to Kai-Koumou; the two women
were resigned to their fate; the men dissembled their sufferings with
superhuman effort.
They arrived in the presence of the Maori chief.
“You killed Kara-Tete,” said he to Glenarvan.
“I did,” answered Glenarvan.
“You die to-morrow at sunrise.”
“Alone?” asked Glenarvan, with a beating heart.
“Oh! if our Tohonga’s life was not more precious than yours!” exclaimed
Kai-Koumou, with a ferocious expression of regret.
At this moment there was a commotion among the natives. Glenarvan
looked quickly around; the crowd made way, and a warrior appeared heated by
running, and sinking with fatigue.
Kai-Koumou, as soon as he saw him, said in English, evidently for the
benefit of the captives:
“You come from the camp of the Pakekas?”
“Yes,” answered the Maori.
“You have seen the prisoner, our Tohonga?”
“I have seen him.”
“Alive?”
“Dead! English have shot him.”
It was all over with Glenarvan and his companions.
“All!” cried Kai-Koumou; “you all die to-morrow at daybreak.”
Punishment fell on all indiscriminately. Lady Helena and Mary Grant were
grateful to Heaven for the boon.
The captives were not taken back to Ware-Atoua. They were destined to
attend the obsequies of the chief and the bloody rites that accompanied them.
A guard of natives conducted them to the foot of an immense kauri, and then
stood on guard without taking their eyes off the prisoners.
The three prescribed days had elapsed since the death of Kara-Tete, and the
soul of the dead warrior had finally departed; so the ceremonies commenced.
The body was laid on a small mound in the central enclosure. It was
clothed in a rich dress, and wrapped in a magnificent flax mat. His head,
adorned with feathers, was encircled with a crown of green leaves. His face,
arms, and chest had been rubbed with oil, and did not show any sign of decay.
The parents and friends arrived at the foot of the mound, and at a certain
moment, as if the leader of an orchestra were leading a funeral chant, there
arose a great wail of tears, sighs, and sobs. They lamented the deceased with a
plaintive rhythm and doleful cadence. The kinsmen beat their heads; the
kinswomen tore their faces with their nails and lavished more blood than tears.
But these demonstrations were not sufficient to propitiate the soul of the
deceased, whose wrath might strike the survivors of his tribe; and his warriors,
as they could not recall him to life, were anxious that he should have nothing
to wish for in the other world. The wife of Kara-Tete was not to be parted
from him; indeed, she would have refused to survive him. It was a custom, as
well as a duty, and Maori history has no lack of such sacrifices.
This woman came on the scene; she was still young. Her disheveled hair
flowed over her shoulders. Her sobs and cries filled the air. Incoherent words,
regrets, sobs, broken phrases in which she extolled the virtues of the dead,
alternated with her moans, and in a crowning paroxysm of sorrow, she threw
herself at the foot of the mound and beat her head on the earth.
The Kai-Koumou drew near; suddenly the wretched victim rose; but a
violent blow from a “MERE,” a kind of club brandished by the chief, struck
her to the ground; she fell senseless.
Horrible yells followed; a hundred arms threatened the terror-stricken
captives. But no one moved, for the funeral ceremonies were not yet over.
The wife of Kara-Tete had joined her husband. The two bodies lay
stretched side by side. But in the future life, even the presence of his faithful
companion was not enough. Who would attend on them in the realm of NouiAtoua, if their slaves did not follow them into the other world.
Six unfortunate fellows were brought to the mound. They were attendants
whom the pitiless usages of war had reduced to slavery. During the chief’s
lifetime they had borne the severest privations, and been subjected to all kinds
of ill-usage; they had been scantily fed, and incessantly occupied like beasts of
burden, and now, according to Maori ideas, they were to resume to all eternity
this life of bondage.
These poor creatures appeared quite resigned to their destiny. They were
not taken by surprise. Their unbound hands showed that they met their fate
without resistance.
Their death was speedy and not aggravated by tedious suffering; torture
was reserved for the authors of the murder, who, only twenty paces off,
averted their eyes from the horrible scene which was to grow yet more
horrible.
Six blows of the MERE, delivered by the hands of six powerful warriors,
felled the victims in the midst of a sea of blood.
This was the signal for a fearful scene of cannibalism. The bodies of slaves
are not protected by taboo like those of their masters. They belong to the tribe;
they were a sort of small change thrown among the mourners, and the moment
the sacrifice was over, the whole crowd, chiefs, warriors, old men, women,
children, without distinction of age, or sex, fell upon the senseless remains
with brutal appetite. Faster than a rapid pen could describe it, the bodies, still
reeking, were dismembered, divided, cut up, not into morsels, but into crumbs.
Of the two hundred Maories present everyone obtained a share. They fought,
they struggled, they quarreled over the smallest fragment. The drops of hot
blood splashed over these festive monsters, and the whole of this detestable
crew groveled under a rain of blood. It was like the delirious fury of tigers
fighting over their prey, or like a circus where the wild beasts devour the deer.
This scene ended, a score of fires were lit at various points of the “pah”; the
smell of charred flesh polluted the air; and but for the fearful tumult of the
festival, but for the cries that emanated from these flesh-sated throats, the
captives might have heard the bones crunching under the teeth of the
cannibals.
Glenarvan and his companions, breathless with horror, tried to conceal this
fearful scene from the eyes of the two poor ladies. They understood then what
fate awaited them next day at dawn, and also with what cruel torture this death
would be preceded. They were dumb with horror.
The funeral dances commenced. Strong liquors distilled from the “piper
excelsum” animated the intoxication of the natives. They had nothing human
left. It seemed possible that the “taboo” might be forgotten, and they might
rush upon the prisoners, who were already terrified at their delirious gestures.
But Kai-Koumou had kept his own senses amidst the general delirium. He
allowed an hour for this orgy of blood to attain its maximum and then cease,
and the final scene of the obsequies was performed with the accustomed
ceremonial.
The corpses of Kara-Tete and his wife were raised, the limbs were bent,
and laid against the stomach according to the Maori usage; then came the
funeral, not the final interment, but a burial until the moment when the earth
had destroyed the flesh and nothing remained but the skeleton.
The place of “oudoupa,” or the tomb, had been chosen outside the fortress,
about two miles off at the top of a low hill called Maunganamu, situated on the
right bank of the lake, and to this spot the body was to be taken. Two
palanquins of a very primitive kind, hand-barrows, in fact, were brought to the
foot of the mound, and the corpses doubled up so that they were sitting rather
than lying, and their garments kept in place by a band of hanes, were placed
on them. Four warriors took up the litters on their shoulders, and the whole
tribe, repeating their funeral chant, followed in procession to the place of
sepulture.
The captives, still strictly guarded, saw the funeral cortege leave the inner
inclosure of the “pah”; then the chants and cries grew fainter. For about half an
hour the funeral procession remained out of sight, in the hollow valley, and
then came in sight again winding up the mountain side; the distance gave a
fantastic effect to the undulating movement of this long serpentine column.
The tribe stopped at an elevation of about 800 feet, on the summit of
Maunganamu, where the burial place of Kara-Tete had been prepared. An
ordinary Maori would have had nothing but a hole and a heap of earth. But a
powerful and formidable chief destined to speedy deification, was honored
with a tomb worthy of his exploits.
The “oudoupa” had been fenced round, and posts, surmounted with faces
painted in red ochre, stood near the grave where the bodies were to lie. The
relatives had not forgotten that the “Waidoua,” the spirit of the dead, lives on
mortal food, as the body did in this life. Therefore, food was deposited in the
inclosure as well as the arms and clothing of the deceased. Nothing was
omitted for comfort. The husband and wife were laid side by side, then
covered with earth and grass, after another series of laments.
Then the procession wound slowly down the mountain, and henceforth
none dare ascend the slope of Maunganamu on pain of death, for it was
“tabooed,” like Tongariro, where lie the ashes of a chief killed by an
earthquake in 1846.
CHAPTER XII STRANGELY LIBERATED
Just as the sun was sinking beyond Lake Taupo, behind the peaks of
Tuhahua and Pukepapu, the captives were conducted back to their prison.
They were not to leave it again till the tops of the Wahiti Ranges were lit with
the first fires of day.
They had one night in which to prepare for death. Overcome as they were
with horror and fatigue, they took their last meal together.
“We shall need all our strength,” Glenarvan had said, “to look death in the
face. We must show these savages how Europeans can die.”
The meal ended. Lady Helena repeated the evening prayer aloud, her
companions, bare-headed, repeated it after her. Who does not turn his thoughts
toward God in the hour of death? This done, the prisoners embraced each
other. Mary Grant and Helena, in a corner of the hut, lay down on a mat.
Sleep, which keeps all sorrow in abeyance, soon weighed down their eyelids;
they slept in each other’s arms, overcome by exhaustion and prolonged
watching.
Then Glenarvan, taking his friends aside, said: “My dear friends, our lives
and the lives of these poor women are in God’s hands. If it is decreed that we
die to-morrow, let us die bravely, like Christian men, ready to appear without
terror before the Supreme Judge. God, who reads our hearts, knows that we
had a noble end in view. If death awaits us instead of success, it is by His will.
Stern as the decree may seem, I will not repine. But death here, means not
death only, it means torture, insult, perhaps, and here are two ladies—”
Glenarvan’s voice, firm till now, faltered. He was silent a moment, and
having overcome his emotion, he said, addressing the young captain:
“John, you have promised Mary what I promised Lady Helena. What is
your plan?”
“I believe,” said John, “that in the sight of God I have a right to fulfill that
promise.”
“Yes, John; but we are unarmed.”
“No!” replied John, showing him a dagger. “I snatched it from Kara-Tete
when he fell at your feet. My Lord, whichever of us survives the other will
fulfill the wish of Lady Helena and Mary Grant.”
After these words were said, a profound silence ensued. At last the Major
said: “My friends, keep that to the last moment. I am not an advocate of
irremediable measures.”
“I did not speak for ourselves,” said Glenarvan. “Be it as it may, we can
face death! Had we been alone, I should ere now have cried, ‘My friends, let
us make an effort. Let us attack these wretches!’ But with these poor girls—”
At this moment John raised the mat, and counted twenty-five natives
keeping guard on the Ware-Atoua. A great fire had been lighted, and its lurid
glow threw into strong relief the irregular outlines of the “pah.” Some of the
savages were sitting round the brazier; the others standing motionless, their
black outlines relieved against the clear background of flame. But they all kept
watchful guard on the hut confided to their care.
It has been said that between a vigilant jailer and a prisoner who wishes to
escape, the chances are in favor of the prisoner; the fact is, the interest of the
one is keener than that of the other. The jailer may forget that he is on guard;
the prisoner never forgets that he is guarded. The captive thinks oftener of
escaping than the jailer of preventing his flight, and hence we hear of frequent
and wonderful escapes.
But in the present instance hatred and revenge were the jailers—not an
indifferent warder; the prisoners were not bound, but it was because bonds
were useless when five-and-twenty men were watching the only egress from
the Ware-Atoua.
This house, with its back to the rock which closed the fortress, was only
accessible by a long, narrow promontory which joined it in front to the plateau
on which the “pah” was erected. On its two other sides rose pointed rocks,
which jutted out over an abyss a hundred feet deep. On that side descent was
impossible, and had it been possible, the bottom was shut in by the enormous
rock. The only outlet was the regular door of the Ware-Atoua, and the Maories
guarded the promontory which united it to the “pah” like a drawbridge. All
escape was thus hopeless, and Glenarvan having tried the walls for the
twentieth time, was compelled to acknowledge that it was so.
The hours of this night, wretched as they were, slipped away. Thick
darkness had settled on the mountain. Neither moon nor stars pierced the
gloom. Some gusts of wind whistled by the sides of the “pah,” and the posts of
the house creaked: the fire outside revived with the puffs of wind, and the
flames sent fitful gleams into the interior of Ware-Atoua. The group of
prisoners was lit up for a moment; they were absorbed in their last thoughts,
and a deathlike silence reigned in the hut.
It might have been about four o’clock in the morning when the Major’s
attention was called to a slight noise which seemed to come from the
foundation of the posts in the wall of the hut which abutted on the rock.
McNabbs was at first indifferent, but finding the noise continue, he listened;
then his curiosity was aroused, and he put his ear to the ground; it sounded as
if someone was scraping or hollowing out the ground outside.
As soon as he was sure of it, he crept over to Glenarvan and John Mangles,
and startling them from their melancholy thoughts, led them to the end of the
hut.
“Listen,” said he, motioning them to stoop.
The scratching became more and more audible; they could hear the little
stones grate on a hard body and roll away.
“Some animal in his burrow,” said John Mangles.
Glenarvan struck his forehead.
“Who knows?” said he, “it might be a man.”
“Animal or man,” answered the Major, “I will soon find out!”
Wilson and Olbinett joined their companions, and all united to dig through
the wall—John with his dagger, the others with stones taken from the ground,
or with their nails, while Mulrady, stretched along the ground, watched the
native guard through a crevice of the matting.
These savages sitting motionless around the fire, suspected nothing of what
was going on twenty feet off.
The soil was light and friable, and below lay a bed of silicious tufa;
therefore, even without tools, the aperture deepened quickly. It soon became
evident that a man, or men, clinging to the sides of the “pah,” were cutting a
passage into its exterior wall. What could be the object? Did they know of the
existence of the prisoners, or was it some private enterprise that led to the
undertaking?
The prisoners redoubled their efforts. Their fingers bled, but still they
worked on; after half an hour they had gone three feet deep; they perceived by
the increased sharpness of the sounds that only a thin layer of earth prevented
immediate communication.
Some minutes more passed, and the Major withdrew his hand from the
stroke of a sharp blade. He suppressed a cry.
John Mangles, inserting the blade of his poniard, avoided the knife which
now protruded above the soil, but seized the hand that wielded it.
It was the hand of a woman or child, a European! On neither side had a
word been uttered. It was evidently the cue of both sides to be silent.
“Is it Robert?” whispered Glenarvan.
But softly as the name was breathed, Mary Grant, already awakened by the
sounds in the hut, slipped over toward Glenarvan, and seizing the hand, all
stained with earth, she covered it with kisses.
“My darling Robert,” said she, never doubting, “it is you! it is you!”
“Yes, little sister,” said he, “it is I am here to save you all; but be very
silent.”
“Brave lad!” repeated Glenarvan.
“Watch the savages outside,” said Robert.
Mulrady, whose attention was distracted for a moment by the appearance
of the boy, resumed his post.
“It is all right,” said he. “There are only four awake; the rest are asleep.”
A minute after, the hole was enlarged, and Robert passed from the arms of
his sister to those of Lady Helena. Round his body was rolled a long coil of
flax rope.
“My child, my child,” murmured Lady Helena, “the savages did not kill
you!”
“No, madam,” said he; “I do not know how it happened, but in the scuffle I
got away; I jumped the barrier; for two days I hid in the bushes, to try and see
you; while the tribe were busy with the chief’s funeral, I came and
reconnoitered this side of the path, and I saw that I could get to you. I stole
this knife and rope out of the desert hut. The tufts of bush and the branches
made me a ladder, and I found a kind of grotto already hollowed out in the
rock under this hut; I had only to bore some feet in soft earth, and here I am.”
Twenty noiseless kisses were his reward.
“Let us be off!” said he, in a decided tone.
“Is Paganel below?” asked Glenarvan.
“Monsieur Paganel?” replied the boy, amazed.
“Yes; is he waiting for us?”
“No, my Lord; but is he not here?” inquired Robert.
“No, Robert!” answered Mary Grant.
“Why! have you not seen him?” asked Glenarvan. “Did you lose each
other in the confusion? Did you not get away together?”
“No, my Lord!” said Robert, taken aback by the disappearance of his
friend Paganel.
“Well, lose no more time,” said the Major. “Wherever Paganel is, he
cannot be in worse plight than ourselves. Let us go.”
Truly, the moments were precious. They had to fly. The escape was not
very difficult, except the twenty feet of perpendicular fall outside the grotto.
After that the slope was practicable to the foot of the mountain. From this
point the prisoners could soon gain the lower valleys; while the Maories, if
they perceived the flight of the prisoners, would have to make a long round to
catch them, being unaware of the gallery between the Ware-Atoua and the
outer rock.
The escape was commenced, and every precaution was taken. The captives
passed one by one through the narrow passage into the grotto. John Mangles,
before leaving the hut, disposed of all the evidences of their work, and in his
turn slipped through the opening and let down over it the mats of the house, so
that the entrance to the gallery was quite concealed.
The next thing was to descend the vertical wall to the slope below, and this
would have been impracticable, but that Robert had brought the flax rope,
which was now unrolled and fixed to a projecting point of rock, the end
hanging over.
John Mangles, before his friends trusted themselves to this flax rope, tried
it; he did not think it very strong; and it was of importance not to risk
themselves imprudently, as a fall would be fatal.
“This rope,” said he, “will only bear the weight of two persons; therefore
let us go in rotation. Lord and Lady Glenarvan first; when they arrive at the
bottom, three pulls at the rope will be a signal to us to follow.”
“I will go first,” said Robert. “I discovered a deep hollow at the foot of the
slope where those who come down can conceal themselves and wait for the
rest.”
“Go, my boy,” said Glenarvan, pressing Robert’s hand.
Robert disappeared through the opening out of the grotto. A minute after,
the three pulls at the cord informed them the boy had alighted safely.
Glenarvan and Lady Helena immediately ventured out of the grotto. The
darkness was still very great, though some grayish streaks were already visible
on the eastern summits.
The biting cold of the morning revived the poor young lady. She felt
stronger and commenced her perilous descent.
Glenarvan first, then Lady Helena, let themselves down along the rope, till
they came to the spot where the perpendicular wall met the top of the slope.
Then Glenarvan going first and supporting his wife, began to descend
backward.
He felt for the tufts and grass and shrubs able to afford a foothold; tried
them and then placed Lady Helena’s foot on them. Some birds, suddenly
awakened, flew away, uttering feeble cries, and the fugitives trembled when a
stone loosened from its bed rolled to the foot of the mountain.
They had reached half-way down the slope, when a voice was heard from
the opening of the grotto.
“Stop!” whispered John Mangles.
Glenarvan, holding with one hand to a tuft of tetragonia, with the other
holding his wife, waited with breathless anxiety.
Wilson had had an alarm. Having heard some unusual noise outside the
Ware-Atoua, he went back into the hut and watched the Maories from behind
the mat. At a sign from him, John stopped Glenarvan.
One of the warriors on guard, startled by an unusual sound, rose and drew
nearer to the Ware-Atoua. He stood still about two paces from the hut and
listened with his head bent forward. He remained in that attitude for a minute
that seemed an hour, his ear intent, his eye peering into the darkness. Then
shaking his head like one who sees he is mistaken, he went back to his
companions, took an armful of dead wood, and threw it into the smouldering
fire, which immediately revived. His face was lighted up by the flame, and
was free from any look of doubt, and after having glanced to where the first
light of dawn whitened the eastern sky, stretched himself near the fire to warm
his stiffened limbs.
“All’s well!” whispered Wilson.
John signaled to Glenarvan to resume his descent.
Glenarvan let himself gently down the slope; soon Lady Helena and he
landed on the narrow track where Robert waited for them.
The rope was shaken three times, and in his turn John Mangles, preceding
Mary Grant, followed in the dangerous route.
He arrived safely; he rejoined Lord and Lady Glenarvan in the hollow
mentioned by Robert.
Five minutes after, all the fugitives had safely escaped from the WareAtoua, left their retreat, and keeping away from the inhabited shores of the
lakes, they plunged by narrow paths into the recesses of the mountains.
They walked quickly, trying to avoid the points where they might be seen
from the pah. They were quite silent, and glided among the bushes like
shadows. Whither? Where chance led them, but at any rate they were free.
Toward five o’clock, the day began to dawn, bluish clouds marbled the
upper stratum of clouds. The misty summits began to pierce the morning
mists. The orb of day was soon to appear, and instead of giving the signal for
their execution, would, on the contrary, announce their flight.
It was of vital importance that before the decisive moment arrived they
should put themselves beyond the reach of the savages, so as to put them off
their track. But their progress was slow, for the paths were steep. Lady
Glenarvan climbed the slopes, supported, not to say carried, by Glenarvan, and
Mary Grant leaned on the arm of John Mangles; Robert, radiant with joy,
triumphant at his success, led the march, and the two sailors brought up the
rear.
Another half an hour and the glorious sun would rise out of the mists of the
horizon. For half an hour the fugitives walked on as chance led them. Paganel
was not there to take the lead. He was now the object of their anxiety, and
whose absence was a black shadow between them and their happiness. But
they bore steadily eastward, as much as possible, and faced the gorgeous
morning light. Soon they had reached a height of 500 feet above Lake Taupo,
and the cold of the morning, increased by the altitude, was very keen. Dim
outlines of hills and mountains rose behind one another; but Glenarvan only
thought how best to get lost among them. Time enough by and by to see about
escaping from the labyrinth.
At last the sun appeared and sent his first rays on their path.
Suddenly a terrific yell from a hundred throats rent the air. It came from
the pah, whose direction Glenarvan did not know. Besides, a thick veil of fog,
which, spread at his feet, prevented any distinct view of the valleys below.
But the fugitives could not doubt that their escape had been discovered;
and now the question was, would they be able to elude pursuit? Had they been
seen? Would not their track betray them?
At this moment the fog in the valley lifted, and enveloped them for a
moment in a damp mist, and at three hundred feet below they perceived the
swarming mass of frantic natives.
While they looked they were seen. Renewed howls broke forth, mingled
with the barking of dogs, and the whole tribe, after vainly trying to scale the
rock of Ware-Atoua, rushed out of the pah, and hastened by the shortest paths
in pursuit of the prisoners who were flying from their vengeance.
CHAPTER XIII THE SACRED MOUNTAIN
The summit of the mountain was still a hundred feet above them. The
fugitives were anxious to reach it that they might continue their flight on the
eastern slope out of the view of their pursuers. They hoped then to find some
practicable ridge that would allow of a passage to the neighboring peaks that
were thrown together in an orographic maze, to which poor Paganel’s genius
would doubtless have found the clew.
They hastened up the slope, spurred on by the loud cries that drew nearer
and nearer. The avenging crowd had already reached the foot of the mountain.
“Courage! my friends,” cried Glenarvan, urging his companions by voice
and look.
In less than five minutes they were at the top of the mountain, and then
they turned to judge of their position, and decide on a route that would baffle
their pursuers.
From their elevated position they could see over Lake Taupo, which
stretched toward the west in its setting of picturesque mountains. On the north
the peaks of Pirongia; on the south the burning crater of Tongariro. But
eastward nothing but the rocky barrier of peaks and ridges that formed the
Wahiti ranges, the great chain whose unbroken links stretch from the East
Cape to Cook’s Straits. They had no alternative but to descend the opposite
slope and enter the narrow gorges, uncertain whether any outlet existed.
Glenarvan could not prolong the halt for a moment. Wearied as they might
be, they must fly or be discovered.
“Let us go down!” cried he, “before our passage is cut off.”
But just as the ladies had risen with a despairing effort, McNabbs stopped
them and said:
“Glenarvan, it is useless. Look!”
And then they all perceived the inexplicable change that had taken place in
the movements of the Maories.
Their pursuit had suddenly stopped. The ascent of the mountain had ceased
by an imperious command. The natives had paused in their career, and surged
like the sea waves against an opposing rock. All the crowd, thirsting for blood,
stood at the foot of the mountain yelling and gesticulating, brandishing guns
and hatchets, but not advancing a foot. Their dogs, rooted to the spot like
themselves, barked with rage.
What stayed them? What occult power controlled these savages? The
fugitives looked without understanding, fearing lest the charm that enchained
Kai-Koumou’s tribe should be broken.
Suddenly John Mangles uttered an exclamation which attracted the
attention of his companions. He pointed to a little inclosure on the summit of
the cone.
“The tomb of Kara-Tete!” said Robert.
“Are you sure, Robert?” said Glenarvan.
“Yes, my Lord, it is the tomb; I recognize it.”
Robert was right. Fifty feet above, at the extreme peak of the mountain,
freshly painted posts formed a small palisaded inclosure, and Glenarvan too
was convinced that it was the chief’s burial place. The chances of their flight
had led them to the crest of Maunganamu.
Glenarvan, followed by the rest, climbed to the foot of the tomb. A large
opening, covered with mats, led into it. Glenarvan was about to invade the
sanctity of the “oudoupa,” when he reeled backward.
“A savage!” said he.
“In the tomb?” inquired the Major.
“Yes, McNabbs.”
“No matter; go in.”
Glenarvan, the Major, Robert and John Mangles entered. There sat a
Maori, wrapped in a large flax mat; the darkness of the “oudoupa” preventing
them from distinguishing his features. He was very quiet, and was eating his
breakfast quite coolly.
Glenarvan was about to speak to him when the native forestalled him by
saying gayly and in good English:
“Sit down, my Lord; breakfast is ready.”
It was Paganel. At the sound of his voice they all rushed into the
“oudoupa,” and he was cordially embraced all round. Paganel was found
again. He was their salvation. They wanted to question him; to know how and
why he was here on the summit of Maunganamu; but Glenarvan stopped this
misplaced curiosity.
“The savages?” said he.
“The savages,” said Paganel, shrugging his shoulders. “I have a contempt
for those people! Come and look at them.”
They all followed Paganel out of the “oudoupa.” The Maories were still in
the same position round the base of the mountain, uttering fearful cries.
“Shout! yell! till your lungs are gone, stupid wretches!” said Paganel. “I
dare you to come here!”
“But why?” said Glenarvan.
“Because the chief is buried here, and the tomb protects us, because the
mountain is tabooed.”
“Tabooed?”
“Yes, my friends! and that is why I took refuge here, as the malefactors
used to flee to the sanctuaries in the middle ages.”
“God be praised!” said Lady Helena, lifting her hands to heaven.
The fugitives were not yet out of danger, but they had a moment’s respite,
which was very welcome in their exhausted state.
Glenarvan was too much overcome to speak, and the Major nodded his
head with an air of perfect content.
“And now, my friends,” said Paganel, “if these brutes think to exercise
their patience on us, they are mistaken. In two days we shall be out of their
reach.”
“By flight!” said Glenarvan. “But how?”
“That I do not know,” answered Paganel, “but we shall manage it.”
And now everybody wanted to know about their friend’s adventures. They
were puzzled by the reserve of a man generally so talkative; on this occasion
they had to drag the words out of his mouth; usually he was a ready storyteller, now he gave only evasive answers to the questions of the rest.
“Paganel is another man!” thought McNabbs.
His face was really altered. He wrapped himself closely in his great flax
mat and seemed to deprecate observation. Everyone noticed his
embarrassment, when he was the subject of conversation, though nobody
appeared to remark it; when other topics were under discussion, Paganel
resumed his usual gayety.
Of his adventures all that could be extracted from him at this time was as
follows:
After the murder of Kara-Tete, Paganel took advantage, like Robert, of the
commotion among the natives, and got out of the inclosure. But less fortunate
than young Grant, he walked straight into a Maori camp, where he met a tall,
intelligent-looking chief, evidently of higher rank than all the warriors of his
tribe. The chief spoke excellent English, and he saluted the new-comer by
rubbing the end of his nose against the end of the geographer’s nose.
Paganel wondered whether he was to consider himself a prisoner or not.
But perceiving that he could not stir without the polite escort of the chief, he
soon made up his mind on that point.
This chief, Hihi, or Sunbeam, was not a bad fellow. Paganel’s spectacles
and telescope seemed to give him a great idea of Paganel’s importance, and he
manifested great attachment to him, not only by kindness, but by a strong flax
rope, especially at night.
This lasted for three days; to the inquiry whether he was well treated, he
said “Yes and no!” without further answer; he was a prisoner, and except that
he expected immediate execution, his state seemed to him no better than that
in which he had left his unfortunate friends.
One night, however, he managed to break his rope and escape. He had seen
from afar the burial of the chief, and knew that he was buried on the top of
Maunganamu, and he was well acquainted with the fact that the mountain
would be therefore tabooed. He resolved to take refuge there, being unwilling
to leave the region where his companions were in durance. He succeeded in
his dangerous attempt, and had arrived the previous night at the tomb of KaraTete, and there proposed to recruit his strength while he waited in the hope
that his friends might, by Divine mercy, find the means of escape.
Such was Paganel’s story. Did he designedly conceal some incident of his
captivity? More than once his embarrassment led them to that conclusion. But
however that might be, he was heartily congratulated on all sides. And then
the present emergency came on for serious discussion. The natives dare not
climb Maunganamu, but they, of course, calculated that hunger and thirst
would restore them their prey. It was only a question of time, and patience is
one of the virtues of all savages. Glenarvan was fully alive to the difficulty,
but made up his mind to watch for an opportunity, or make one. First of all he
made a thorough survey of Maunganamu, their present fortress; not for the
purpose of defence, but of escape. The Major, John, Robert, Paganel, and
himself, made an exact map of the mountain. They noted the direction, outlet
and inclination of the paths. The ridge, a mile in length, which united
Maunganamu to the Wahiti chain had a downward inclination. Its slope,
narrow and jagged though it was, appeared the only practicable route, if they
made good their escape at all. If they could do this without observation, under
cover of night, they might possibly reach the deep valleys of the Range and
put the Maories off the scent.
But there were dangers in this route; the last part of it was within pistol
shot of natives posted on the lower slopes. Already when they ventured on the
exposed part of the crest, they were saluted with a hail of shot which did not
reach them. Some gun wads, carried by the wind, fell beside them; they were
made of printed paper, which Paganel picked up out of curiosity, and with
some trouble deciphered.
“That is a good idea! My friends, do you know what those creatures use for
wads?”
“No, Paganel!” said Glenarvan.
“Pages of the Bible! If that is the use they make of the Holy Book, I pity
the missionaries! It will be rather difficult to establish a Maori library.”
“And what text of scripture did they aim at us?”
“A message from God Himself!” exclaimed John Mangles, who was in the
act of reading the scorched fragment of paper. “It bids us hope in Him,” added
the young captain, firm in the faith of his Scotch convictions.
“Read it, John!” said Glenarvan.
And John read what the powder had left visible: “I will deliver him, for he
hath trusted in me.”
“My friends,” said Glenarvan, “we must carry these words of hope to our
dear, brave ladies. The sound will bring comfort to their hearts.”
Glenarvan and his companions hastened up the steep path to the cone, and
went toward the tomb. As they climbed they were astonished to perceive every
few moments a kind of vibration in the soil. It was not a movement like
earthquake, but that peculiar tremor that affects the metal of a boiler under
high pressure. It was clear the mountain was the outer covering of a body of
vapor, the product of subterranean fires.
This phenomenon of course excited no surprise in those that had just
traveled among the hot springs of the Waikato. They knew that the central
region of the Ika-na-Mani is essentially volcanic. It is a sieve, whose
interstices furnish a passage for the earth’s vapors in the shape of boiling
geysers and solfataras.
Paganel, who had already noticed this, called the attention of his friends to
the volcanic nature of the mountain. The peak of Maunganamu was only one
of the many cones which bristle on this part of the island. It was a volcano of
the future. A slight mechanical change would produce a crater of eruption in
these slopes, which consisted merely of whitish silicious tufa.
“That may be,” said Glenarvan, “but we are in no more danger here than
standing by the boiler of the DUNCAN; this solid crust is like sheet iron.”
“I agree with you,” added the Major, “but however good a boiler may be, it
bursts at last after too long service.”
“McNabbs,” said Paganel, “I have no fancy for staying on the cone. When
Providence points out a way, I will go at once.”
“I wish,” remarked John, “that Maunganamu could carry us himself, with
all the motive power that he has inside. It is too bad that millions of horsepower should lie under our feet unavailable for our needs. Our DUNCAN
would carry us to the end of the world with the thousandth part of it.”
The recollections of the DUNCAN evoked by John Mangles turned
Glenarvan’s thoughts into their saddest channel; for desperate as his own case
was he often forgot it, in vain regret at the fate of his crew.
His mind still dwelt on it when he reached the summit of Maunganamu and
met his companions in misfortune.
Lady Helena, when she saw Glenarvan, came forward to meet him.
“Dear Edward,” said she, “you have made up your mind? Are we to hope
or fear?”
“Hope, my dear Helena,” replied Glenarvan. “The natives will never set
foot on the mountain, and we shall have time to devise a plan of escape.”
“More than that, madam, God himself has encouraged us to hope.”
And so saying, John Mangles handed to Lady Helena the fragment of
paper on which was legible the sacred words; and these young women, whose
trusting hearts were always open to observe Providential interpositions, read in
these words an indisputable sign of salvation.
“And now let us go to the ‘oudoupa!’” cried Paganel, in his gayest mood.
“It is our castle, our dining-room, our study! None can meddle with us there!
Ladies! allow me to do the honors of this charming abode.”
They followed Paganel, and when the savages saw them profaning anew
the tabooed burial place, they renewed their fire and their fearful yells, the one
as loud as the other. But fortunately the balls fell short of our friends, though
the cries reached them.
Lady Helena, Mary Grant, and their companions were quite relieved to
find that the Maories were more dominated by superstition than by anger, and
they entered the monument.
It was a palisade made of red-painted posts. Symbolic figures, tattooed on
the wood, set forth the rank and achievements of the deceased. Strings of
amulets, made of shells or cut stones, hung from one part to another. In the
interior, the ground was carpeted with green leaves, and in the middle, a slight
mound betokened the place of the newly made grave. There lay the chief’s
weapons, his guns loaded and capped, his spear, his splendid ax of green jade,
with a supply of powder and ball for the happy hunting grounds.
“Quite an arsenal!” said Paganel, “of which we shall make a better use.
What ideas they have! Fancy carrying arms in the other world!”
“Well!” said the Major, “but these are English firearms.”
“No doubt,” replied Glenarvan, “and it is a very unwise practice to give
firearms to savages! They turn them against the invaders, naturally enough.
But at any rate, they will be very valuable to us.”
“Yes,” said Paganel, “but what is more useful still is the food and water
provided for Kara-Tete.”
Things had been handsomely done for the deceased chief; the amount of
provisions denoted their esteem for the departed. There was food enough to
sustain ten persons for fifteen days, or the dead man forever.
The vegetable aliments consisted of edible ferns, sweet potatoes, the
“convolvulus batatas,” which was indigenous, and the potato which had been
imported long before by the Europeans. Large jars contained pure water, and a
dozen baskets artistically plaited contained tablets of an unknown green gum.
The fugitives were therefore provided for some days against hunger and
thirst, and they needed no persuasion to begin their attack on the deceased
chief’s stores. Glenarvan brought out the necessary quantity and put them into
Olbinett’s hands. The steward, who never could forget his routine ideas, even
in the most exceptional circumstances, thought the meal a slender one. He did
not know how to prepare the roots, and, besides, had no fire.
But Paganel soon solved the difficulty by recommending him to bury his
fern roots and sweet potatoes in the soil. The temperature of the surface
stratum was very high, and a thermometer plunged into the soil would have
marked from 160 to 170 degrees; in fact, Olbinett narrowly missed being
scalded, for just as he had scooped a hole for the roots, a jet of vapor sprang
up and with a whistling sound rose six feet above the ground.
The steward fell back in terror.
“Shut off steam!” cried the Major, running to close the hole with the loose
drift, while Paganel pondering on the singular phenomenon muttered to
himself:
“Let me see! ha! ha! Why not?”
“Are you hurt?” inquired McNabbs of Olbinett.
“No, Major,” said the steward, “but I did not expect—”
“That Providence would send you fire,” interrupted Paganel in a jovial
tone. “First the larder of Kara-Tete and then fire out of the ground! Upon my
word, this mountain is a paradise! I propose that we found a colony, and
cultivate the soil and settle here for life! We shall be the Robinsons of
Maunganamu. We should want for nothing.”
“If it is solid ground,” said John Mangles.
“Well! it is not a thing of yesterday,” said Paganel. “It has stood against the
internal fire for many a day, and will do so till we leave it, at any rate.”
“Breakfast is ready,” announced Olbinett with as much dignity as if he was
in Malcolm Castle.
Without delay, the fugitives sat down near the palisade, and began one of
the many meals with which Providence had supplied them in critical
circumstances. Nobody was inclined to be fastidious, but opinions were
divided as regarded the edible fern. Some thought the flavor sweet and
agreeable, others pronounced it leathery, insipid, and resembling the taste of
gum. The sweet potatoes, cooked in the burning soil, were excellent. The
geographer remarked that Kara-Tete was not badly off after all.
And now that their hunger was appeased, it was time to decide on their
plan of escape.
“So soon!” exclaimed Paganel in a piteous tone. “Would you quit the home
of delight so soon?”
“But, Monsieur Paganel,” interposed Lady Helena, “if this be Capua, you
dare not intend to imitate Hannibal!”
“Madam, I dare not contradict you, and if discussion is the order of the
day, let it proceed.”
“First,” said Glenarvan, “I think we ought to start before we are driven to it
by hunger. We are revived now, and ought to take advantage of it. To-night we
will try to reach the eastern valleys by crossing the cordon of natives under
cover of the darkness.”
“Excellent,” answered Paganel, “if the Maories allow us to pass.”
“And if not?” asked John Mangles.
“Then we will use our great resources,” said Paganel.
“But have we great resources?” inquired the Major.
“More than we can use!” replied Paganel, without any further explanation.
And then they waited for the night.
The natives had not stirred. Their numbers seemed even greater, perhaps
owing to the influx of the stragglers of the tribe. Fires lighted at intervals
formed a girdle of flame round the base of the mountain, so that when
darkness fell, Maunganamu appeared to rise out of a great brasier, and to hide
its head in the thick darkness. Five hundred feet below they could hear the
hum and the cries of the enemy’s camp.
At nine o’clock the darkness being very intense, Glenarvan and John
Mangles went out to reconnoiter before embarking the whole party on this
critical journey. They made the descent noiselessly, and after about ten
minutes, arrived on the narrow ridge that crossed the native lines, fifty feet
above the camp.
All went well so far. The Maories, stretched beside the fires, did not appear
to observe the two fugitives. But in an instant a double fusillade burst forth
from both sides of the ridge.
“Back,” exclaimed Glenarvan; “those wretches have the eyes of cats and
the guns of riflemen!”
And they turned, and once more climbed the steep slope of the mountain,
and then hastened to their friends who had been alarmed at the firing.
Glenarvan’s hat was pierced by two balls, and they concluded that it was out
of the question to venture again on the ridge between two lines of marksmen.
“Wait till to-morrow,” said Paganel, “and as we cannot elude their
vigilance, let me try my hand on them.”
The night was cold; but happily Kara-Tete had been furnished with his best
night gear, and the party wrapped themselves each in a warm flax mantle, and
protected by native superstition, slept quietly inside the inclosure, on the warm
ground, still violating with the violence of the internal ebullition.
CHAPTER XIV A BOLD STRATAGEM
Next day, February 17th, the sun’s first rays awoke the sleepers of the
Maunganamu. The Maories had long since been astir, coming and going at the
foot of the mountain, without leaving their line of observation. Furious clamor
broke out when they saw the Europeans leave the sacred place they had
profaned.
Each of the party glanced first at the neighboring mountains, and at the
deep valleys still drowned in mist, and over Lake Taupo, which the morning
breeze ruffled slightly. And then all clustered round Paganel eager to hear his
project.
Paganel soon satisfied their curiosity. “My friends,” said he, “my plan has
one great recommendation; if it does not accomplish all that I anticipate, we
shall be no worse off than we are at present. But it must, it will succeed.”
“And what is it?” asked McNabbs.
“It is this,” replied Paganel, “the superstition of the natives has made this
mountain a refuge for us, and we must take advantage of their superstition to
escape. If I can persuade Kai-Koumou that we have expiated our profanation,
that the wrath of the Deity has fallen on us: in a word, that we have died a
terrible death, do you think he will leave the plateau of Maunganamu to return
to his village?”
“Not a doubt of it,” said Glenarvan.
“And what is the horrible death you refer to?” asked Lady Helena.
“The death of the sacrilegious, my friends,” replied Paganel. “The
avenging flames are under our feet. Let us open a way for them!”
“What! make a volcano!” cried John Mangles.
“Yes, an impromptu volcano, whose fury we can regulate. There are plenty
of vapors ready to hand, and subterranean fires ready to issue forth. We can
have an eruption ready to order.”
“An excellent idea, Paganel; well conceived,” said the Major.
“You understand,” replied the geographer, “we are to pretend to fall
victims to the flames of the Maori Pluto, and to disappear spiritually into the
tomb of Kara-Tete. And stay there three, four, even five days if necessary—
that is to say, till the savages are convinced that we have perished, and
abandon their watch.”
“But,” said Miss Grant, “suppose they wish to be sure of our punishment,
and climb up here to see?”
“No, my dear Mary,” returned Paganel. “They will not do that. The
mountain is tabooed, and if it devoured its sacrilegious intruders, it would only
be more inviolably tabooed.”
“It is really a very clever plan,” said Glenarvan. “There is only one chance
against it; that is, if the savages prolong their watch at the foot of
Maunganamu, we may run short of provisions. But if we play our game well
there is not much fear of that.”
“And when shall we try this last chance?” asked Lady Helena.
“To-night,” rejoined Paganel, “when the darkness is the deepest.”
“Agreed,” said McNabbs; “Paganel, you are a genius! and I, who seldom
get up an enthusiasm, I answer for the success of your plan. Oh! those villains!
They shall have a little miracle that will put off their conversion for another
century. I hope the missionaries will forgive us.”
The project of Paganel was therefore adopted, and certainly with the
superstitious ideas of the Maories there seemed good ground for hope. But
brilliant as the idea might be, the difficulty was in the modus operandi. The
volcano might devour the bold schemers, who offered it a crater. Could they
control and direct the eruption when they had succeeded in letting loose its
vapor and flames, and lava streams? The entire cone might be engulfed. It was
meddling with phenomena of which nature herself has the absolute monopoly.
Paganel had thought of all this; but he intended to act prudently and
without pushing things to extremes. An appearance would be enough to dupe
the Maories, and there was no need for the terrible realities of an eruption.
How long that day seemed. Each one of the party inwardly counted the
hours. All was made ready for flight. The oudoupa provisions were divided
and formed very portable packets. Some mats and firearms completed their
light equipment, all of which they took from the tomb of the chief. It is
needless to say that their preparations were made within the inclosure, and that
they were unseen by the savages.
At six o’clock the steward served up a refreshing meal. Where or when
they would eat in the valleys of the Ranges no one could foretell. So that they
had to take in supplies for the future. The principal dish was composed of half
a dozen rats, caught by Wilson and stewed. Lady Helena and Mary Grant
obstinately refused to taste this game, which is highly esteemed by the natives;
but the men enjoyed it like the real Maories. The meat was excellent and
savory, and the six devourers were devoured down to the bones.
The evening twilight came on. The sun went down in a stormy-looking
bank of clouds. A few flashes of lightning glanced across the horizon and
distant thunder pealed through the darkened sky.
Paganel welcomed the storm, which was a valuable aid to his plans, and
completed his program. The savages are superstitiously affected by the great
phenomena of nature. The New Zealanders think that thunder is the angry
voice of Noui-Atoua, and lightning the fierce gleam of his eyes. Thus their
deity was coming personally to chastise the violators of the taboo.
At eight o’clock, the summit of the Maunganamu was lost in portentous
darkness. The sky would supply a black background for the blaze which
Paganel was about to throw on it. The Maories could no longer see their
prisoners; and this was the moment for action. Speed was necessary.
Glenarvan, Paganel, McNabbs, Robert, the steward, and the two sailors, all
lent a hand.
The spot for the crater was chosen thirty paces from Kara-Tete’s tomb. It
was important to keep the oudoupa intact, for if it disappeared, the taboo of the
mountain would be nullified. At the spot mentioned Paganel had noticed an
enormous block of stone, round which the vapors played with a certain degree
of intensity. This block covered a small natural crater hollowed in the cone,
and by its own weight prevented the egress of the subterranean fire. If they
could move it from its socket, the vapors and the lava would issue by the
disencumbered opening.
The workers used as levers some posts taken from the interior of the
oudoupa, and they plied their tools vigorously against the rocky mass. Under
their united efforts the stone soon moved. They made a little trench so that it
might roll down the inclined plane. As they gradually raised it, the vibrations
under foot became more distinct. Dull roarings of flame and the whistling
sound of a furnace ran along under the thin crust. The intrepid la-borers,
veritable Cyclops handling Earth’s fires, worked in silence; soon some fissures
and jets of steam warned them that their place was growing dangerous. But a
crowning effort moved the mass which rolled down and disappeared.
Immediately the thin crust gave way. A column of fire rushed to the sky with
loud detonations, while streams of boiling water and lava flowed toward the
native camp and the lower valleys.
All the cone trembled as if it was about to plunge into a fathomless gulf.
Glenarvan and his companions had barely time to get out of the way; they
fled to the enclosure of the oudoupa, not without having been sprinkled with
water at 220 degrees. This water at first spread a smell like soup, which soon
changed into a strong odor of sulphur.
Then the mud, the lava, the volcanic stones, all spouted forth in a torrent.
Streams of fire furrowed the sides of Maunganamu. The neighboring
mountains were lit up by the glare; the dark valleys were also filled with
dazzling light.
All the savages had risen, howling under the pain inflicted by the burning
lava, which was bubbling and foaming in the midst of their camp.
Those whom the liquid fire had not touched fled to the surrounding hills;
then turned, and gazed in terror at this fearful phenomenon, this volcano in
which the anger of their deity would swallow up the profane intruders on the
sacred mountain. Now and then, when the roar of the eruption became less
violent, their cry was heard:
“Taboo! taboo! taboo!”
An enormous quantity of vapors, heated stones and lava was escaping by
this crater of Maunganamu. It was not a mere geyser like those that girdle
round Mount Hecla, in Iceland, it was itself a Hecla. All this volcanic
commotion was confined till then in the envelope of the cone, because the
safety valve of Tangariro was enough for its expansion; but when this new
issue was afforded, it rushed forth fiercely, and by the laws of equilibrium, the
other eruptions in the island must on that night have lost their usual intensity.
An hour after this volcano burst upon the world, broad streams of lava
were running down its sides. Legions of rats came out of their holes, and fled
from the scene.
All night long, and fanned by the tempest in the upper sky, the crater never
ceased to pour forth its torrents with a violence that alarmed Glenarvan. The
eruption was breaking away the edges of the opening. The prisoners, hidden
behind the inclosure of stakes, watched the fearful progress of the
phenomenon.
Morning came. The fury of the volcano had not slackened. Thick yellowish
fumes were mixed with the flames; the lava torrents wound their serpentine
course in every direction.
Glenarvan watched with a beating heart, looking from all the interstices of
the palisaded enclosure, and observed the movements in the native camp.
The Maories had fled to the neighboring ledges, out of the reach of the
volcano. Some corpses which lay at the foot of the cone, were charred by the
fire. Further off toward the “pah,” the lava had reached a group of twenty huts,
which were still smoking. The Maories, forming here and there groups,
contemplated the canopied summit of Maunganamu with religious awe.
Kai-Koumou approached in the midst of his warriors, and Glenarvan
recognized him. The chief advanced to the foot of the hill, on the side
untouched by the lava, but he did not ascend the first ledge.
Standing there, with his arms stretched out like an exerciser, he made some
grimaces, whose meaning was obvious to the prisoners. As Paganel had
foreseen, Kai-Koumou launched on the avenging mountain a more rigorous
taboo.
Soon after the natives left their positions and followed the winding paths
that led toward the pah.
“They are going!” exclaimed Glenarvan. “They have left their posts! God
be praised! Our stratagem has succeeded! My dear Lady Helena, my brave
friends, we are all dead and buried! But this evening when night comes, we
shall rise and leave our tomb, and fly these barbarous tribes!”
It would be difficult to conceive of the joy that pervaded the oudoupa.
Hope had regained the mastery in all hearts. The intrepid travelers forgot the
past, forgot the future, to enjoy the present delight! And yet the task before
them was not an easy one—to gain some European outpost in the midst of this
unknown country. But Kai-Koumou once off their track, they thought
themselves safe from all the savages in New Zealand.
A whole day had to elapse before they could make a start, and they
employed it in arranging a plan of flight. Paganel had treasured up his map of
New Zealand, and on it could trace out the best roads.
After discussion, the fugitives resolved to make for the Bay of Plenty,
towards the east. The region was unknown, but apparently desert. The
travelers, who from their past experience, had learned to make light of
physical difficulties, feared nothing but meeting Maories. At any cost they
wanted to avoid them and gain the east coast, where the missionaries had
several stations. That part of the country had hitherto escaped the horrors of
war, and the natives were not in the habit of scouring the country.
As to the distance that separated Lake Taupo from the Bay of Plenty, they
calculated it about a hundred miles. Ten days’ march at ten miles a day, could
be done, not without fatigue, but none of the party gave that a thought. If they
could only reach the mission stations they could rest there while waiting for a
favorable opportunity to get to Auckland, for that was the point they desired to
reach.
This question settled, they resumed their watch of the native proceedings,
and continued so doing till evening fell. Not a solitary native remained at the
foot of the mountain, and when darkness set in over the Taupo valleys, not a
fire indicated the presence of the Maories at the base. The road was free.
At nine o’clock, the night being unusually dark, Glenarvan gave the order
to start. His companions and he, armed and equipped at the expense of KaraTete, began cautiously to descend the slopes of Maunganamu, John Mangles
and Wilson leading the way, eyes and ears on the alert. They stopped at the
slightest sound, they started at every passing cloud. They slid rather than
walked down the spur, that their figures might be lost in the dark mass of the
mountain. At two hundred feet below the summit, John Mangles and his
sailors reached the dangerous ridge that had been so obstinately defended by
the natives. If by ill luck the Maories, more cunning than the fugitives, had
only pretended to retreat; if they were not really duped by the volcanic
phenomenon, this was the spot where their presence would be betrayed.
Glenarvan could not but shudder, in spite of his confidence, and in spite of the
jokes of Paganel. The fate of the whole party would hang in the balance for the
ten minutes required to pass along that ridge. He felt the beating of Lady
Helena’s heart, as she clung to his arm.
He had no thought of turning back. Neither had John. The young captain,
followed closely by the whole party, and protected by the intense darkness,
crept along the ridge, stopping when some loose stone rolled to the bottom. If
the savages were still in the ambush below, these unusual sounds might
provoke from both sides a dangerous fusillade.
But speed was impossible in their serpent-like progress down this sloping
crest. When John Mangles had reached the lowest point, he was scarcely
twenty-five feet from the plateau, where the natives were encamped the night
before, and then the ridge rose again pretty steeply toward a wood for about a
quarter of a mile.
All this lower part was crossed without molestation, and they commenced
the ascent in silence. The clump of bush was invisible, though they knew it
was there, and but for the possibility of an ambush, Glenarvan counted on
being safe when the party arrived at that point. But he observed that after this
point, they were no longer protected by the taboo. The ascending ridge
belonged not to Maunganamu, but to the mountain system of the eastern side
of Lake Taupo, so that they had not only pistol shots, but hand-to-hand
fighting to fear. For ten minutes, the little band ascended by insensible degrees
toward the higher table-land. John could not discern the dark wood, but he
knew it ought to be within two hundred feet. Suddenly he stopped; almost
retreated. He fancied he heard something in the darkness; his stoppage
interrupted the march of those behind.
He remained motionless long enough to alarm his companions. They
waited with unspeakable anxiety, wondering if they were doomed to retrace
their steps, and return to the summit of Maunganamu.
But John, finding that the noise was not repeated, resumed the ascent of the
narrow path of the ridge. Soon they perceived the shadowy outline of the
wood showing faintly through the darkness. A few steps more and they were
hid from sight in the thick foliage of the trees.
CHAPTER XV FROM PERIL TO SAFETY
The night favored their escape, and prudence urged them to lose no time in
getting away from the fatal neighborhood of Lake Taupo. Paganel took the
post of leader, and his wonderful instinct shone out anew in this difficult
mountain journey. His nyctalopia was a great advantage, his cat-like sight
enabling him to distinguish the smallest object in the deepest gloom.
For three hours they walked on without halting along the far-reaching
slope of the eastern side. Paganel kept a little to the southeast, in order to make
use of a narrow passage between the Kaimanawa and the Wahiti Ranges,
through which the road from Hawkes’ Bay to Auckland passes. Once through
that gorge, his plan was to keep off the road, and, under the shelter of the high
ranges, march to the coast across the inhabited regions of the province.
At nine o’clock in the morning, they had made twelve miles in twelve
hours. The courageous women could not be pressed further, and, besides, the
locality was suitable for camping. The fugitives had reached the pass that
separates the two chains. Paganel, map in hand, made a loop toward the
northeast, and at ten o’clock the little party reached a sort of redan, formed by
a projecting rock.
The provisions were brought out, and justice was done to their meal. Mary
Grant and the Major, who had not thought highly of the edible fern till then,
now ate of it heartily.
The halt lasted till two o’clock in the afternoon, then they resumed their
journey; and in the evening they stopped eight miles from the mountains, and
required no persuasion to sleep in the open air.
Next day was one of serious difficulties. Their route lay across this
wondrous region of volcanic lakes, geysers, and solfataras, which extended to
the east of the Wahiti Ranges. It is a country more pleasant for the eye to
ramble over, than for the limbs. Every quarter of a mile they had to turn aside
or go around for some obstacle, and thus incurred great fatigue; but what a
strange sight met their eyes! What infinite variety nature lavishes on her great
panoramas!
On this vast extent of twenty miles square, the subterranean forces had a
field for the display of all their varied effects. Salt springs, of singular
transparency, peopled by myriads of insects, sprang up from thickets of teatree scrub. They diffused a powerful odor of burnt powder, and scattered on
the ground a white sediment like dazzling snow. The limpid waters were
nearly at boiling point, while some neighboring springs spread out like sheets
of glass. Gigantic tree-ferns grew beside them, in conditions analogous to
those of the Silurian vegetation.
On every side jets of water rose like park fountains, out of a sea of vapor;
some of them continuous, others intermittent, as if a capricious Pluto
controlled their movements. They rose like an amphitheater on natural
terraces; their waters gradually flowed together under folds of white smoke,
and corroding the edges of the semi-transparent steps of this gigantic staircase.
They fed whole lakes with their boiling torrents.
Farther still, beyond the hot springs and tumultuous geysers, came the
solfataras. The ground looked as if covered with large pustules. These were
slumbering craters full of cracks and fissures from which rose various gases.
The air was saturated with the acrid and unpleasant odor of sulphurous acid.
The ground was encrusted with sulphur and crystalline concretions. All this
incalculable wealth had been accumulating for centuries, and if the sulphur
beds of Sicily should ever be exhausted, it is here, in this little known district
of New Zealand, that supplies must be sought.
The fatigue in traveling in such a country as this will be best understood.
Camping was very difficult, and the sportsmen of the party shot nothing
worthy of Olbinett’s skill; so that they had generally to content themselves
with fern and sweet potato—a poor diet which was scarcely sufficient to
recruit the exhausted strength of the little party, who were all anxious to
escape from this barren region.
But four days at least must elapse before they could hope to leave it. On
February 23, at a distance of fifty miles from Maunganamu, Glenarvan called
a halt, and camped at the foot of a nameless mountain, marked on Paganel’s
map. The wooded plains stretched away from sight, and great forests appeared
on the horizon.
That day McNabbs and Robert killed three kiwis, which filled the chief
place on their table, not for long, however, for in a few moments they were all
consumed from the beaks to the claws.
At dessert, between the potatoes and sweet potatoes, Paganel moved a
resolution which was carried with enthusiasm. He proposed to give the name
of Glenarvan to this unnamed mountain, which rose 3,000 feet high, and then
was lost in the clouds, and he printed carefully on his map the name of the
Scottish nobleman.
It would be idle to narrate all the monotonous and uninteresting details of
the rest of the journey. Only two or three occurrences of any importance took
place on the way from the lakes to the Pacific Ocean. The march was all day
long across forests and plains. John took observations of the sun and stars.
Neither heat nor rain increased the discomfort of the journey, but the travelers
were so reduced by the trials they had undergone, that they made very slow
progress; and they longed to arrive at the mission station.
They still chatted, but the conversation had ceased to be general. The little
party broke up into groups, attracted to each other, not by narrow sympathies,
but by a more personal communion of ideas.
Glenarvan generally walked alone; his mind seemed to recur to his
unfortunate crew, as he drew nearer to the sea. He apparently lost sight of the
dangers which lay before them on their way to Auckland, in the thought of his
massacred men; the horrible picture haunted him.
Harry Grant was never spoken of; they were no longer in a position to
make any effort on his behalf. If his name was uttered at all, it was between
his daughter and John Mangles.
John had never reminded Mary of what she had said to him on that last
night at Ware-Atoua. He was too wise to take advantage of a word spoken in a
moment of despair. When he mentioned Captain Grant, John always spoke of
further search. He assured Mary that Lord Glenarvan would re-embark in the
enterprise. He persistently returned to the fact that the authenticity of the
document was indisputable, and that therefore Harry Grant was somewhere to
be found, and that they would find him, if they had to try all over the world.
Mary drank in his words, and she and John, united by the same thought,
cherished the same hope. Often Lady Helena joined in the conversation; but
she did not participate in their illusions, though she refrained from chilling
their enthusiasm.
McNabbs, Robert, Wilson, and Mulrady kept up their hunting parties,
without going far from the rest, and each one furnished his QUOTA of game.
Paganel, arrayed in his flax mat, kept himself aloof, in a silent and pensive
mood.
And yet, it is only justice to say, in spite of the general rule that, in the
midst of trials, dangers, fatigues, and privations, the most amiable dispositions
become ruffled and embittered, all our travelers were united, devoted, ready to
die for one another.
On the 25th of February, their progress was stopped by a river which
answered to the Wakari on Paganel’s map, and was easily forded. For two days
plains of low scrub succeeded each other without interruption. Half the
distance from Lake Taupo to the coast had been traversed without accident,
though not without fatigue.
Then the scene changed to immense and interminable forests, which
reminded them of Australia, but here the kauri took the place of the
eucalyptus. Although their enthusiasm had been incessantly called forth during
their four months’ journey, Glenarvan and his companions were compelled to
admire and wonder at those gigantic pines, worthy rivals of the Cedars of
Lebanon, and the “Mammoth trees” of California. The kauris measured a
hundred feet high, before the ramification of the branches. They grew in
isolated clumps, and the forest was not composed of trees, but of innumerable
groups of trees, which spread their green canopies in the air two hundred feet
from the ground.
Some of these pines, still young, about a hundred years old, resembled the
red pine of Europe. They had a dark crown surmounted by a dark conical
shoot. Their older brethren, five or six hundred years of age, formed great
green pavilions supported on the inextricable network of their branches. These
patriarchs of the New Zealand forest measured fifty yards in circumference,
and the united arms of all the travelers could not embrace the giant trunk.
For three days the little party made their way under these vast arches, over
a clayey soil which the foot of man had never trod. They knew this by the
quantity of resinous gum that lay in heaps at the foot of the trees, and which
would have lasted for native exportation many years.
The sportsmen found whole coveys of the kiwi, which are scarce in
districts frequented by the Maories; the native dogs drive them away to the
shelter of these inaccessible forests. They were an abundant source of
nourishing food to our travelers.
Paganel also had the good fortune to espy, in a thicket, a pair of gigantic
birds; his instinct as a naturalist was awakened. He called his companions, and
in spite of their fatigue, the Major, Robert, and he set off on the track of these
animals.
His curiosity was excusable, for he had recognized, or thought he had
recognized, these birds as “moas” belonging to the species of “dinornis,”
which many naturalists class with the extinct birds. This, if Paganel was right,
would confirm the opinion of Dr. Hochstetter and other travelers on the
present existence of the wingless giants of New Zealand.
These moas which Paganel was chasing, the contemporaries of the
Megatherium and the Pterodactyles, must have been eighteen feet high. They
were huge ostriches, timid too, for they fled with extreme rapidity. But no shot
could stay their course. After a few minutes of chase, these fleet-footed moas
disappeared among the tall trees, and the sportsmen lost their powder and their
pains.
That evening, March 1, Glenarvan and his companions, emerging at last
from the immense kauri-forest, camped at the foot of Mount Ikirangi, whose
summit rose five thousand five hundred feet into the air. At this point they had
traveled a hundred miles from Maunganamu, and the shore was still thirty
miles away. John Mangles had calculated on accomplishing the whole journey
in ten days, but he did not foresee the physical difficulties of the country.
On the whole, owing to the circuits, the obstacles, and the imperfect
observations, the journey had been extended by fully one-fifth, and now that
they had reached Mount Ikirangi, they were quite worn out.
Two long days of walking were still to be accomplished, during which time
all their activity and vigilance would be required, for their way was through a
district often frequented by the natives. The little party conquered their
weariness, and set out next morning at daybreak.
Between Mount Ikirangi which was left to the right, and Mount Hardy
whose summit rose on the left to a height of 3,700 feet, the journey was very
trying; for about ten miles the bush was a tangle of “supple-jack,” a kind of
flexible rope, appropriately called “stifling-creeper,” that caught the feet at
every step. For two days, they had to cut their way with an ax through this
thousand-headed hydra. Hunting became impossible, and the sportsmen failed
in their accustomed tribute. The provisions were almost exhausted, and there
was no means of renewing them; their thirst was increasing by fatigue, and
there was no water wherewith to quench it.
The sufferings of Glenarvan and his party became terrible, and for the first
time their moral energy threatened to give way. They no longer walked, they
dragged themselves along, soulless bodies, animated only by the instinct of
self-preservation which survives every other feeling, and in this melancholy
plight they reached Point Lottin on the shores of the Pacific.
Here they saw several deserted huts, the ruins of a village lately destroyed
by the war, abandoned fields, and everywhere signs of pillage and incendiary
fires.
They were toiling painfully along the shore, when they saw, at a distance
of about a mile, a band of natives, who rushed toward them brandishing their
weapons. Glenarvan, hemmed in by the sea, could not fly, and summoning all
his remaining strength he was about to meet the attack, when John Mangles
cried:
“A boat! a boat!”
And there, twenty paces off, a canoe with six oars lay on the beach. To
launch it, jump in and fly from the dangerous shore, was only a minute’s work.
John Mangles, McNabbs, Wilson and Mulrady took the oars; Glenarvan the
helm; the two women, Robert and Olbinett stretched themselves beside him.
In ten minutes the canoe was a quarter of a mile from the shore. The sea was
calm. The fugitives were silent. But John, who did not want to get too far from
land, was about to give the order to go up the coast, when he suddenly stopped
rowing.
He saw three canoes coming out from behind Point Lottin and evidently
about to give chase.
“Out to sea! Out to sea!” he exclaimed. “Better to drown if we must!”
The canoe went fast under her four rowers. For half an hour she kept her
distance; but the poor exhausted fellows grew weaker, and the three pursuing
boats began to gain sensibly on them. At this moment, scarcely two miles lay
between them. It was impossible to avoid the attack of the natives, who were
already preparing to fire their long guns.
What was Glenarvan about?—standing up in the stern he was looking
toward the horizon for some chimerical help. What did he hope for? What did
he wish? Had he a presentiment?
In a moment his eyes gleamed, his hand pointed out into the distance.
“A ship! a ship!” he cried. “My friends, row! row hard!”
Not one of the rowers turned his head—not an oar-stroke must be lost.
Paganel alone rose, and turned his telescope to the point indicated.
“Yes,” said he, “a ship! a steamer! they are under full steam! they are
coming to us! Found now, brave comrades!”
The fugitives summoned new energy, and for another half hour, keeping
their distance, they rowed with hasty strokes. The steamer came nearer and
nearer. They made out her two masts, bare of sails, and the great volumes of
black smoke. Glenarvan, handing the tiller to Robert, seized Paganel’s glass,
and watched the movements of the steamer.
John Mangles and his companions were lost in wonder when they saw
Glenarvan’s features contract and grow pale, and the glass drop from his
hands. One word explained it.
“The DUNCAN!” exclaimed Glenarvan. “The DUNCAN, and the
convicts!”
“The DUNCAN!” cried John, letting go his oar and rising.
“Yes, death on all sides!” murmured Glenarvan, crushed by despair.
It was indeed the yacht, they could not mistake her—the yacht and her
bandit crew!
The major could scarcely restrain himself from cursing their destiny.
The canoe was meantime standing still. Where should they go? Whither
fly? What choice was there between the convicts and the savages?
A shot was fired from the nearest of the native boats, and the ball struck
Wilson’s oar.
A few strokes then carried the canoe nearer to the DUNCAN.
The yacht was coming down at full speed, and was not more than half a
mile off.
John Mangles, between two enemies, did not know what to advise, whither
to fly! The two poor ladies on their knees, prayed in their agony.
The savages kept up a running fire, and shots were raining round the
canoe, when suddenly a loud report was heard, and a ball from the yacht’s
cannon passed over their heads, and now the boat remained motionless
between the DUNCAN and the native canoes.
John Mangles, frenzied with despair, seized his ax. He was about to scuttle
the boat and sink it with his unfortunate companions, when a cry from Robert
arrested his arm.
“Tom Austin! Tom Austin!” the lad shouted. “He is on board! I see him!
He knows us! He is waving his hat.”
The ax hung useless in John’s hand.
A second ball whistled over his head, and cut in two the nearest of the
three native boats, while a loud hurrah burst forth on board the DUNCAN.
The savages took flight, fled and regained the shore.
“Come on, Tom, come on!” cried John Mangles in a joyous voice.
And a few minutes after, the ten fugitives, how, they knew not, were all
safe on board the DUNCAN.
CHAPTER XVI WHY THE “DUNCAN” WENT TO NEW ZEALAND
It would be vain to attempt to depict the feelings of Glenarvan and his
friends when the songs of old Scotia fell on their ears. The moment they set
foot on the deck of the DUNCAN, the piper blew his bagpipes, and
commenced the national pibroch of the Malcolm clan, while loud hurrahs rent
the air.
Glenarvan and his whole party, even the Major himself, were crying and
embracing each other. They were delirious with joy. The geographer was
absolutely mad. He frisked about, telescope in hand, pointing it at the last
canoe approaching the shore.
But at the sight of Glenarvan and his companions, with their clothing in
rags, and thin, haggard faces, bearing marks of horrible sufferings, the crew
ceased their noisy demonstrations. These were specters who had returned—not
the bright, adventurous travelers who had left the yacht three months before,
so full of hope! Chance, and chance only, had brought them back to the deck
of the yacht they never thought to see again. And in what a state of exhaustion
and feebleness. But before thinking of fatigue, or attending to the imperious
demands of hunger and thirst, Glenarvan questioned Tom Austin about his
being on this coast.
Why had the DUNCAN come to the eastern coast of New Zealand? How
was it not in the hands of Ben Joyce? By what providential fatality had God
brought them in the track of the fugitives?
Why? how? and for what purpose? Tom was stormed with questions on all
sides. The old sailor did not know which to listen to first, and at last resolved
to hear nobody but Glenarvan, and to answer nobody but him.
“But the convicts?” inquired Glenarvan. “What did you do with them?”
“The convicts?” replied Tom, with the air of a man who does not in the
least understand what he is being asked.
“Yes, the wretches who attacked the yacht.”
“What yacht? Your Honor’s?”
“Why, of course, Tom. The DUNCAN, and Ben Joyce, who came on
board.”
“I don’t know this Ben Joyce, and have never seen him.”
“Never seen him!” exclaimed Paganel, stupefied at the old sailor’s replies.
“Then pray tell me, Tom, how it is that the DUNCAN is cruising at this
moment on the coast of New Zealand?”
But if Glenarvan and his friends were totally at a loss to understand the
bewilderment of the old sailor, what was their amazement when he replied in a
calm voice:
“The DUNCAN is cruising here by your Honor’s orders.”
“By my orders?” cried Glenarvan.
“Yes, my Lord. I only acted in obedience to the instructions sent in your
letter of January fourteenth.”
“My letter! my letter!” exclaimed Glenarvan.
The ten travelers pressed closer round Tom Austin, devouring him with
their eyes. The letter dated from Snowy River had reached the DUNCAN,
then.
“Let us come to explanations, pray, for it seems to me I am dreaming. You
received a letter, Tom?”
“Yes, a letter from your Honor.”
“At Melbourne?”
“At Melbourne, just as our repairs were completed.”
“And this letter?”
“It was not written by you, but bore your signature, my Lord.”
“Just so; my letter was brought by a convict called Ben Joyce.”
“No, by a sailor called Ayrton, a quartermaster on the BRITANNIA.”
“Yes, Ayrton or Ben Joyce, one and the same individual. Well, and what
were the contents of this letter?”
“It contained orders to leave Melbourne without delay, and go and cruise
on the eastern coast of—”
“Australia!” said Glenarvan with such vehemence that the old sailor was
somewhat disconcerted.
“Of Australia?” repeated Tom, opening his eyes. “No, but New Zealand.”
“Australia, Tom! Australia!” they all cried with one voice.
Austin’s head began to feel in a whirl. Glenarvan spoke with such
assurance that he thought after all he must have made a mistake in reading the
letter. Could a faithful, exact old servant like himself have been guilty of such
a thing! He turned red and looked quite disturbed.
“Never mind, Tom,” said Lady Helena. “God so willed it.”
“But, no, madam, pardon me,” replied old Tom. “No, it is impossible, I
was not mistaken. Ayrton read the letter as I did, and it was he, on the
contrary, who wished to bring me to the Australian coast.”
“Ayrton!” cried Glenarvan.
“Yes, Ayrton himself. He insisted it was a mistake: that you meant to order
me to Twofold Bay.”
“Have you the letter still, Tom?” asked the Major, extremely interested in
this mystery.
“Yes, Mr. McNabbs,” replied Austin. “I’ll go and fetch it.”
He ran at once to his cabin in the forecastle. During his momentary
absence they gazed at each other in silence, all but the Major, who crossed his
arms and said:
“Well, now, Paganel, you must own this would be going a little too far.”
“What?” growled Paganel, looking like a gigantic note of interrogation,
with his spectacles on his forehead and his stooping back.
Austin returned directly with the letter written by Paganel and signed by
Glenarvan.
“Will your Honor read it?” he said, handing it to him.
Glenarvan took the letter and read as follows:
“Order to Tom Austin to put out to sea without delay, and to take the
Duncan, by latitude 37 degrees to the eastern coast of New Zealand!”
“New Zealand!” cried Paganel, leaping up.
And he seized the letter from Glenarvan, rubbed his eyes, pushed down his
spectacles on his nose, and read it for himself.
“New Zealand!” he repeated in an indescribable tone, letting the order slip
between his fingers.
That same moment he felt a hand laid on his shoulder, and turning round
found himself face to face with the Major, who said in a grave tone:
“Well, my good Paganel, after all, it is a lucky thing you did not send the
DUNCAN to Cochin China!”
This pleasantry finished the poor geographer. The crew burst out into loud
Homeric laughter. Paganel ran about like a madman, seized his head with both
hands and tore his hair. He neither knew what he was doing nor what he
wanted to do. He rushed down the poop stairs mechanically and paced the
deck, nodding to himself and going straight before without aim or object till he
reached the forecastle. There his feet got entangled in a coil of rope. He
stumbled and fell, accidentally catching hold of a rope with both hands in his
fall.
Suddenly a tremendous explosion was heard. The forecastle gun had gone
off, riddling the quiet calm of the waves with a volley of small shot. The
unfortunate Paganel had caught hold of the cord of the loaded gun. The
geographer was thrown down the forecastle ladder and disappeared below.
A cry of terror succeeded the surprise produced by the explosion.
Everybody thought something terrible must have happened. The sailors rushed
between decks and lifted up Paganel, almost bent double. The geographer
uttered no sound.
They carried his long body onto the poop. His companions were in despair.
The Major, who was always the surgeon on great occasions, began to strip the
unfortunate that he might dress his wounds; but he had scarcely put his hands
on the dying man when he started up as if touched by an electrical machine.
“Never! never!” he exclaimed, and pulling his ragged coat tightly round
him, he began buttoning it up in a strangely excited manner.
“But, Paganel,” began the Major.
“No, I tell you!”
“I must examine—”
“You shall not examine.”
“You may perhaps have broken—” continued McNabbs.
“Yes,” continued Paganel, getting up on his long legs, “but what I have
broken the carpenter can mend.”
“What is it, then?”
“There.”
Bursts of laughter from the crew greeted this speech. Paganel’s friends
were quite reassured about him now. They were satisfied that he had come off
safe and sound from his adventure with the forecastle gun.
“At any rate,” thought the Major, “the geographer is wonderfully bashful.”
But now Paganel was recovered a little, he had to reply to a question he
could not escape.
“Now, Paganel,” said Glenarvan, “tell us frankly all about it. I own that
your blunder was providential. It is sure and certain that but for you the
DUNCAN would have fallen into the hands of the convicts; but for you we
should have been recaptured by the Maories. But for my sake tell me by what
supernatural aberration of mind you were induced to write New Zealand
instead of Australia?”
“Well, upon my oath,” said Paganel, “it is—”
But the same instant his eyes fell on Mary and Robert Grant, and he
stopped short and then went on:
“What would you have me say, my dear Glenarvan? I am mad, I am an
idiot, an incorrigible fellow, and I shall live and die the most terrible absent
man. I can’t change my skin.”
“Unless you get flayed alive.”
“Get flayed alive!” cried the geographer, with a furious look. “Is that a
personal allusion?”
“An allusion to what?” asked McNabbs, quietly. This was all that passed.
The mystery of the DUNCAN’S presence on the coast was explained, and all
that the travelers thought about now was to get back to their comfortable
cabins, and to have breakfast.
However, Glenarvan and John Mangles stayed behind with Tom Austin
after the others had retired. They wished to put some further questions to him.
“Now, then, old Austin,” said Glenarvan, “tell me, didn’t it strike you as
strange to be ordered to go and cruise on the coast of New Zealand?”
“Yes, your Honor,” replied Tom. “I was very much surprised, but it is not
my custom to discuss any orders I receive, and I obeyed. Could I do
otherwise? If some catastrophe had occurred through not carrying out your
injunctions to the letter, should not I have been to blame? Would you have
acted differently, captain?”
“No, Tom,” replied John Mangles.
“But what did you think?” asked Glenarvan.
“I thought, your Honor, that in the interest of Harry Grant, it was necessary
to go where I was told to go. I thought that in consequence of fresh
arrangements, you were to sail over to New Zealand, and that I was to wait for
you on the east coast of the island. Moreover, on leaving Melbourne, I kept
our destination a secret, and the crew only knew it when we were right out at
sea, and the Australian continent was finally out of sight. But one
circumstance occurred which greatly perplexed me.”
“What was it, Tom?” asked Glenarvan.
“Just this, that when the quartermaster of the BRITANNIA heard our
destination—”
“Ayrton!” cried Glenarvan. “Then he is on board?”
“Yes, your Honor.”
“Ayrton here?” repeated Glenarvan, looking at John Mangles.
“God has so willed!” said the young captain.
In an instant, like lightning, Ayrton’s conduct, his long-planned treachery,
Glenarvan’s wound, Mulrady’s assassination, the sufferings of the expedition
in the marshes of the Snowy River, the whole past life of the miscreant,
flashed before the eyes of the two men. And now, by the strangest concourse
of events, the convict was in their power.
“Where is he?” asked Glenarvan eagerly.
“In a cabin in the forecastle, and under guard.”
“Why was he imprisoned?”
“Because when Ayrton heard the vessel was going to New Zealand, he was
in a fury; because he tried to force me to alter the course of the ship; because
he threatened me; and, last of all, because he incited my men to mutiny. I saw
clearly he was a dangerous individual, and I must take precautions against
him.”
“And since then?”
“Since then he has remained in his cabin without attempting to go out.”
“That’s well, Tom.”
Just at this moment Glenarvan and John Mangles were summoned to the
saloon where breakfast, which they so sorely needed, was awaiting them. They
seated themselves at the table and spoke no more of Ayrton.
But after the meal was over, and the guests were refreshed and invigorated,
and they all went upon deck, Glenarvan acquainted them with the fact of the
quartermaster’s presence on board, and at the same time announced his
intention of having him brought before them.
“May I beg to be excused from being present at his examination?” said
Lady Helena. “I confess, dear Edward, it would be extremely painful for me to
see the wretched man.”
“He must be confronted with us, Helena,” replied Lord Glenarvan; “I beg
you will stay. Ben Joyce must see all his victims face to face.”
Lady Helena yielded to his wish. Mary Grant sat beside her, near
Glenarvan. All the others formed a group round them, the whole party that had
been compromised so seriously by the treachery of the convict. The crew of
the yacht, without understanding the gravity of the situation, kept profound
silence.
“Bring Ayrton here,” said Glenarvan.
CHAPTER XVII AYRTON’S OBSTINACY
Ayrton came. He crossed the deck with a confident tread, and mounted the
steps to the poop. His eyes were gloomy, his teeth set, his fists clenched
convulsively. His appearance betrayed neither effrontery nor timidity. When
he found himself in the presence of Lord Glenarvan he folded his arms and
awaited the questions calmly and silently.
“Ayrton,” said Glenarvan, “here we are then, you and us, on this very
DUNCAN that you wished to deliver into the hands of the convicts of Ben
Joyce.”
The lips of the quartermaster trembled slightly and a quick flush suffused
his impassive features. Not the flush of remorse, but of shame at failure. On
this yacht which he thought he was to command as master, he was a prisoner,
and his fate was about to be decided in a few seconds.
However, he made no reply. Glenarvan waited patiently. But Ayrton
persisted in keeping absolute silence.
“Speak, Ayrton, what have you to say?” resumed Glenarvan.
Ayrton hesitated, the wrinkles in his forehead deepened, and at length he
said in calm voice:
“I have nothing to say, my Lord. I have been fool enough to allow myself
to be caught. Act as you please.”
Then he turned his eyes away toward the coast which lay on the west, and
affected profound indifference to what was passing around him. One would
have thought him a stranger to the whole affair. But Glenarvan was determined
to be patient. Powerful motives urged him to find out certain details
concerning the mysterious life of Ayrton, especially those which related to
Harry Grant and the BRITANNIA. He therefore resumed his interrogations,
speaking with extreme gentleness and firmly restraining his violent irritation
against him.
“I think, Ayrton,” he went on, “that you will not refuse to reply to certain
questions that I wish to put to you; and, first of all, ought I to call you Ayrton
or Ben Joyce? Are you, or are you not, the quartermaster of the
BRITANNIA?”
Ayrton remained impassive, gazing at the coast, deaf to every question.
Glenarvan’s eyes kindled, as he said again:
“Will you tell me how you left the BRITANNIA, and why you are in
Australia?”
The same silence, the same impassibility.
“Listen to me, Ayrton,” continued Glenarvan; “it is to your interest to
speak. Frankness is the only resource left to you, and it may stand you in good
stead. For the last time, I ask you, will you reply to my questions?”
Ayrton turned his head toward Glenarvan, and looked into his eyes.
“My Lord,” he said, “it is not for me to answer. Justice may witness against
me, but I am not going to witness against myself.”
“Proof will be easy,” said Glenarvan.
“Easy, my Lord,” repeated Ayrton, in a mocking tone. “Your honor makes
rather a bold assertion there, it seems to me. For my own part, I venture to
affirm that the best judge in the Temple would be puzzled what to make of me.
Who will say why I came to Australia, when Captain Grant is not here to tell?
Who will prove that I am the Ben Joyce placarded by the police, when the
police have never had me in their hands, and my companions are at liberty?
Who can damage me except yourself, by bringing forward a single crime
against me, or even a blameable action? Who will affirm that I intended to
take possession of this ship and deliver it into the hands of the convicts? No
one, I tell you, no one. You have your suspicions, but you need certainties to
condemn a man, and certainties you have none. Until there is a proof to the
contrary, I am Ayrton, quartermaster of the BRITANNIA.”
Ayrton had become animated while he was speaking, but soon relapsed
into his former indifference.
He, no doubt, expected that his reply would close the examination, but
Glenarvan commenced again, and said:
“Ayrton, I am not a Crown prosecutor charged with your indictment. That
is no business of mine. It is important that our respective situations should be
clearly defined. I am not asking you anything that could compromise you.
That is for justice to do. But you know what I am searching for, and a single
word may put me on the track I have lost. Will you speak?”
Ayrton shook his head like a man determined to be silent.
“Will you tell me where Captain Grant is?” asked Glenarvan.
“No, my Lord,” replied Ayrton.
“Will you tell me where the BRITANNIA was wrecked?”
“No, neither the one nor the other.”
“Ayrton,” said Glenarvan, in almost beseeching tones, “if you know where
Harry Grant is, will you, at least, tell his poor children, who are waiting for
you to speak the word?”
Ayrton hesitated. His features contracted, and he muttered in a low voice,
“I cannot, my Lord.”
Then he added with vehemence, as if reproaching himself for a momentary
weakness:
“No, I will not speak. Have me hanged, if you choose.”
“Hanged!” exclaimed Glenarvan, overcome by a sudden feeling of anger.
But immediately mastering himself, he added in a grave voice:
“Ayrton, there is neither judge nor executioner here. At the first port we
touch at, you will be given up into the hands of the English authorities.”
“That is what I demand,” was the quartermaster’s reply.
Then he turned away and quietly walked back to his cabin, which served as
his prison. Two sailors kept guard at the door, with orders to watch his
slightest movement. The witnesses of this examination retired from the scene
indignant and despairing.
As Glenarvan could make no way against Ayrton’s obstinacy, what was to
be done now? Plainly no course remained but to carry out the plan formed at
Eden, of returning to Europe and giving up for the time this unsuccessful
enterprise, for the traces of the BRITANNIA seemed irrevocably lost, and the
document did not appear to allow any fresh interpretation. On the 37th parallel
there was not even another country, and the DUNCAN had only to turn and go
back.
After Glenarvan had consulted his friends, he talked over the question of
returning, more particularly with the captain. John examined the coal bunkers,
and found there was only enough to last fifteen days longer at the outside. It
was necessary, therefore, to put in at the nearest port for a fresh supply.
John proposed that he should steer for the Bay of Talcahuano, where the
DUNCAN had once before been revictualed before she commenced her
voyage of circumnavigation. It was a direct route across, and lay exactly along
the 37th parallel. From thence the yacht, being amply provisioned, might go
south, double Cape Horn, and get back to Scotland by the Atlantic route.
This plan was adopted, and orders were given to the engineer to get up the
steam. Half an hour afterward the beak-head of the yacht was turned toward
Talcahuano, over a sea worthy of being called the Pacific, and at six P. M. the
last mountains of New Zealand had disappeared in warm, hazy mist on the
horizon.
The return voyage was fairly commenced. A sad voyage, for the
courageous searching party to come back to the port without bringing home
Harry Grant with them! The crew, so joyous at departure and so hopeful, were
coming back to Europe defeated and discouraged. There was not one among
the brave fellows whose heart did not swell at the thought of seeing his own
country once more; and yet there was not one among them either who would
not have been willing to brave the perils of the sea for a long time still if they
could but find Captain Grant.
Consequently, the hurrahs which greeted the return of Lord Glenarvan to
the yacht soon gave place to dejection. Instead of the close intercourse which
had formerly existed among the passengers, and the lively conversations
which had cheered the voyage, each one kept apart from the others in the
solitude of his own cabin, and it was seldom that anyone appeared on the deck
of the DUNCAN.
Paganel, who generally shared in an exaggerated form the feelings of those
about him, whether painful or joyous—a man who could have invented hope if
necessary—even Paganel was gloomy and taciturn. He was seldom visible; his
natural loquacity and French vivacity gave place to silence and dejection. He
seemed even more downhearted than his companions. If Glenarvan spoke at
all of renewing the search, he shook his head like a man who has given up all
hope, and whose convictions concerning the fate of the shipwrecked men
appeared settled. It was quite evident he believed them irrevocably lost.
And yet there was a man on board who could have spoken the decisive
word, and refused to break his silence. This was Ayrton. There was no doubt
the fellow knew, if not the present whereabouts of the captain, at least the
place of shipwreck. But it was evident that were Grant found, he would be a
witness against him. Hence his persistent silence, which gave rise to great
indignation on board, especially among the crew, who would have liked to
deal summarily with him.
Glenarvan repeatedly renewed his attempts with the quartermaster, but
promises and threats were alike useless. Ayrton’s obstinacy was so great, and
so inexplicable, that the Major began to believe he had nothing to reveal. His
opinion was shared, moreover, by the geographer, as it corroborated his own
notion about Harry Grant.
But if Ayrton knew nothing, why did he not confess his ignorance? It could
not be turned against him. His silence increased the difficulty of forming any
new plan. Was the presence of the quartermaster on the Australian continent a
proof of Harry Grant’s being there? It was settled that they must get this
information out of Ayrton.
Lady Helena, seeing her husband’s ill-success, asked his permission to try
her powers against the obstinacy of the quartermaster. When a man had failed,
a woman perhaps, with her gentler influence, might succeed. Is there not a
constant repetition going on of the story of the fable where the storm, blow as
it will, cannot tear the cloak from the shoulders of the traveler, while the first
warm rays of sunshine make him throw it off immediately?
Glenarvan, knowing his young wife’s good sense, allowed her to act as she
pleased.
The same day (the 5th of March), Ayrton was conducted to Lady Helena’s
saloon. Mary Grant was to be present at the interview, for the influence of the
young girl might be considerable, and Lady Helena would not lose any chance
of success.
For a whole hour the two ladies were closeted with the quartermaster, but
nothing transpired about their interview. What had been said, what arguments
they used to win the secret from the convict, or what questions were asked,
remained unknown; but when they left Ayrton, they did not seem to have
succeeded, as the expression on their faces denoted discouragement.
In consequence of this, when the quartermaster was being taken back to his
cabin, the sailors met him with violent menaces. He took no notice except by
shrugging his shoulders, which so increased their rage, that John Mangles and
Glenarvan had to interfere, and could only repress it with difficulty.
But Lady Helena would not own herself vanquished. She resolved to
struggle to the last with this pitiless man, and went next day herself to his
cabin to avoid exposing him again to the vindictiveness of the crew.
The good and gentle Scotchwoman stayed alone with the convict leader for
two long hours. Glenarvan in a state of extreme nervous anxiety, remained
outside the cabin, alternately resolved to exhaust completely this last chance of
success, alternately resolved to rush in and snatch his wife from so painful a
situation.
But this time when Lady Helena reappeared, her look was full of hope.
Had she succeeded in extracting the secret, and awakening in that adamant
heart a last faint touch of pity?
McNabbs, who first saw her, could not restrain a gesture of incredulity.
However the report soon spread among the sailors that the quartermaster
had yielded to the persuasions of Lady Helena. The effect was electrical. The
entire crew assembled on deck far quicker than Tom Austin’s whistle could
have brought them together.
Glenarvan had hastened up to his wife and eagerly asked:
“Has he spoken?”
“No,” replied Lady Helena, “but he has yielded to my entreaties, and
wishes to see you.”
“Ah, dear Helena, you have succeeded!”
“I hope so, Edward.”
“Have you made him any promise that I must ratify?”
“Only one; that you will do all in your power to mitigate his punishment.”
“Very well, dear Helena. Let Ayrton come immediately.”
Lady Helena retired to her cabin with Mary Grant, and the quartermaster
was brought into the saloon where Lord Glenarvan was expecting him.
CHAPTER XVIII A DISCOURAGING CONFESSION
As soon as the quartermaster was brought into the presence of Lord
Glenarvan, his keepers withdrew.
“You wanted to speak to me, Ayrton?” said Glenarvan.
“Yes, my Lord,” replied the quartermaster.
“Did you wish for a private interview?”
“Yes, but I think if Major McNabbs and Mr. Paganel were present it would
be better.”
“For whom?”
“For myself.”
Ayrton spoke quite calmly and firmly. Glenarvan looked at him for an
instant, and then sent to summon McNabbs and Paganel, who came at once.
“We are all ready to listen to you,” said Glenarvan, when his two friends
had taken their place at the saloon table.
Ayrton collected himself, for an instant, and then said:
“My Lord, it is usual for witnesses to be present at every contract or
transaction between two parties. That is why I desire the presence of Messrs.
Paganel and McNabbs, for it is, properly speaking, a bargain which I propose
to make.”
Glenarvan, accustomed to Ayrton’s ways, exhibited no surprise, though
any bargaining between this man and himself seemed strange.
“What is the bargain?” he said.
“This,” replied Ayrton. “You wish to obtain from me certain facts which
may be useful to you. I wish to obtain from you certain advantages which
would be valuable to me. It is giving for giving, my Lord. Do you agree to this
or not?”
“What are the facts?” asked Paganel eagerly.
“No,” said Glenarvan. “What are the advantages?”
Ayrton bowed in token that he understood Glenarvan’s distinction.
“These,” he said, “are the advantages I ask. It is still your intention, I
suppose, to deliver me up to the English authorities?”
“Yes, Ayrton, it is only justice.”
“I don’t say it is not,” replied the quartermaster quietly. “Then of course
you would never consent to set me at liberty.”
Glenarvan hesitated before replying to a question so plainly put. On the
answer he gave, perhaps the fate of Harry Grant might depend!
However, a feeling of duty toward human justice compelled him to say:
“No, Ayrton, I cannot set you at liberty.”
“I do not ask it,” said the quartermaster proudly.
“Then, what is it you want?”
“A middle place, my Lord, between the gibbet that awaits me and the
liberty which you cannot grant me.”
“And that is—”
“To allow me to be left on one of the uninhabited islands of the Pacific,
with such things as are absolute necessaries. I will manage as best I can, and
will repent if I have time.”
Glenarvan, quite unprepared for such a proposal, looked at his two friends
in silence. But after a brief reflection, he replied:
“Ayrton, if I agree to your request, you will tell me all I have an interest in
knowing.”
“Yes, my Lord, that is to say, all I know about Captain Grant and the
BRITANNIA.”
“The whole truth?”
“The whole.”
“But what guarantee have I?”
“Oh, I see what you are uneasy about. You need a guarantee for me, for the
truth of a criminal. That’s natural. But what can you have under the
circumstances. There is no help for it, you must either take my offer or leave
it.”
“I will trust to you, Ayrton,” said Glenarvan, simply.
“And you do right, my Lord. Besides, if I deceive you, vengeance is in
your own power.”
“How?”
“You can come and take me again from where you left me, as I shall have
no means of getting away from the island.”
Ayrton had an answer for everything. He anticipated the difficulties and
furnished unanswerable arguments against himself. It was evident he intended
to affect perfect good faith in the business. It was impossible to show more
complete confidence. And yet he was prepared to go still further in
disinterestedness.
“My Lord and gentlemen,” he added, “I wish to convince you of the fact
that I am playing cards on the table. I have no wish to deceive you, and I am
going to give you a fresh proof of my sincerity in this matter. I deal frankly
with you, because I reckon on your honor.”
“Speak, Ayrton,” said Glenarvan.
“My Lord, I have not your promise yet to accede to my proposal, and yet I
do not scruple to tell you that I know very little about Harry Grant.”
“Very little,” exclaimed Glenarvan.
“Yes, my Lord, the details I am in a position to give you relate to myself.
They are entirely personal, and will not do much to help you to recover the
lost traces of Captain Grant.”
Keen disappointment was depicted on the faces of Glenarvan and the
Major. They thought the quartermaster in the possession of an important
secret, and he declared that his communications would be very nearly barren.
Paganel’s countenance remained unmoved.
Somehow or other, this avowal of Ayrton, and surrender of himself, so to
speak, unconditionally, singularly touched his auditors, especially when the
quartermaster added:
“So I tell you beforehand, the bargain will be more to my profit than
yours.”
“It does not signify,” replied Glenarvan. “I accept your proposal, Ayrton. I
give you my word to land you on one of the islands of the Pacific Ocean.”
“All right, my Lord,” replied the quartermaster.
Was this strange man glad of this decision? One might have doubted it, for
his impassive countenance betokened no emotion whatever. It seemed as if he
were acting for someone else rather than himself.
“I am ready to answer,” he said.
“We have no questions to put to you,” said Glenarvan. “Tell us all you
know, Ayrton, and begin by declaring who you are.”
“Gentlemen,” replied Ayrton, “I am really Tom Ayrton, the quartermaster
of the BRITANNIA. I left Glasgow on Harry Grant’s ship on the 12th of
March, 1861. For fourteen months I cruised with him in the Pacific in search
of an advantageous spot for founding a Scotch colony. Harry Grant was the
man to carry out grand projects, but serious disputes often arose between us.
His temper and mine could not agree. I cannot bend, and with Harry Grant,
when once his resolution is taken, any resistance is impossible, my Lord. He
has an iron will both for himself and others.
“But in spite of that, I dared to rebel, and I tried to get the crew to join me,
and to take possession of the vessel. Whether I was to blame or not is of no
consequence. Be that as it may, Harry Grant had no scruples, and on the 8th of
April, 1862, he left me behind on the west coast of Australia.”
“Of Australia!” said the Major, interrupting Ayrton in his narrative. “Then
of course you had quitted the BRITANNIA before she touched at Callao,
which was her last date?”
“Yes,” replied the quartermaster, “for the BRITANNIA did not touch there
while I was on board. And how I came to speak of Callao at Paddy O’Moore’s
farm was that I learned the circumstances from your recital.”
“Go on, Ayrton,” said Glenarvan.
“I found myself abandoned on a nearly desert coast, but only forty miles
from the penal settlement at Perth, the capital of Western Australia. As I was
wandering there along the shore, I met a band of convicts who had just
escaped, and I joined myself to them. You will dispense, my Lord, with any
account of my life for two years and a half. This much, however, I must tell
you, that I became the leader of the gang, under the name of Ben Joyce. In
September, 1864, I introduced myself at the Irish farm, where I engaged
myself as a servant in my real name, Ayrton. I waited there till I should get
some chance of seizing a ship. This was my one idea. Two months afterward
the DUNCAN arrived. During your visit to the farm you related Captain
Grant’s history, and I learned then facts of which I was not previously aware—
that the BRITANNIA had touched at Callao, and that her latest news was
dated June, 1862, two months after my disembarkation, and also about the
document and the loss of the ship somewhere along the 37th parallel; and,
lastly, the strong reasons you had for supposing Harry Grant was on the
Australian continent. Without the least hesitation I determined to appropriate
the DUNCAN, a matchless vessel, able to outdistance the swiftest ships in the
British Navy. But serious injuries had to be repaired. I therefore let it go to
Melbourne, and joined myself to you in my true character as quartermaster,
offering to guide you to the scene of the shipwreck, fictitiously placed by me
on the east coast of Australia. It was in this way, followed or sometimes
preceded by my gang of convicts, I directed your expedition toward the
province of Victoria. My men committed a bootless crime at Camden Bridge;
since the DUNCAN, if brought to the coast, could not escape me, and with the
yacht once mine, I was master of the ocean. I led you in this way
unsuspectingly as far as the Snowy River. The horses and bullocks dropped
dead one by one, poisoned by the gastrolobium. I dragged the wagon into the
marshes, where it got half buried. At my instance—but you know the rest, my
Lord, and you may be sure that but for the blunder of Mr. Paganel, I should
now command the DUNCAN. Such is my history, gentlemen. My disclosures,
unfortunately, cannot put you on the track of Harry Grant, and you perceive
that you have made but a poor bargain by coming to my terms.”
The quartermaster said no more, but crossed his arms in his usual fashion
and waited. Glenarvan and his friends kept silence. They felt that this strange
criminal had spoken the whole truth. He had only missed his coveted prize, the
DUNCAN, through a cause independent of his will. His accomplices had gone
to Twofold Bay, as was proved by the convict blouse found by Glenarvan.
Faithful to the orders of their chief, they had kept watch on the yacht, and at
length, weary of waiting, had returned to the old haunt of robbers and
incendiaries in the country parts of New South Wales.
The Major put the first question, his object being to verify the dates of the
BRITANNIA.
“You are sure then,” he said, “that it was on the 8th of April you were left
on the west coast of Australia?”
“On that very day,” replied Ayrton.
“And do you know what projects Harry Grant had in view at the time?”
“In an indefinite way I do.”
“Say all you can, Ayrton,” said Glenarvan, “the least indication may set us
in the right course.”
“I only know this much, my Lord,” replied the quartermaster, “that Captain
Grant intended to visit New Zealand. Now, as this part of the programme was
not carried out while I was on board, it is not impossible that on leaving Callao
the BRITANNIA went to reconnoiter New Zealand. This would agree with the
date assigned by the document to the shipwreck—the 27th of June, 1862.”
“Clearly,” said Paganel.
“But,” objected Glenarvan, “there is nothing in the fragmentary words in
the document that could apply to New Zealand.”
“That I cannot answer,” said the quartermaster.
“Well, Ayrton,” said Glenarvan, “you have kept your word, and I will keep
mine. We have to decide now on what island of the Pacific Ocean you are to
be left?”
“It matters little, my Lord,” replied Ayrton.
“Return to your cabin,” said Glenarvan, “and wait our decision.”
The quartermaster withdrew, guarded by the two sailors.
“That villain might have been a man,” said the Major.
“Yes,” returned Glenarvan; “he is a strong, clear-headed fellow. Why was
it that he must needs turn his powers to such evil account?”
“But Harry Grant?”
“I must fear he is irrevocably lost. Poor children! Who can tell them where
their father is?”
“I can!” replied Paganel. “Yes; I can!” One could not help remarking that
the geographer, so loquacious and impatient usually, had scarcely spoken
during Ayrton’s examination. He listened without opening his mouth. But this
speech of his now was worth many others, and it made Glenarvan spring to his
feet, crying out: “You, Paganel! you know where Captain Grant is?”
“Yes, as far as can be known.”
“How do you know?”
“From that infernal document.”
“Ah!” said the Major, in a tone of the most profound incredulity.
“Hear me first, and shrug your shoulders afterward,” said Paganel. “I did
not speak sooner, because you would not have believed me. Besides, it was
useless; and I only speak to-day because Ayrton’s opinion just supports my
own.”
“Then it is New Zealand?” asked Glenarvan.
“Listen and judge,” replied Paganel. “It is not without reason, or, rather, I
had a reason for making the blunder which has saved our lives. When I was in
the very act of writing the letter to Glenarvan’s dictation, the word ZEALAND
was swimming in my brain. This is why. You remember we were in the
wagon. McNabbs had just apprised Lady Helena about the convicts; he had
given her the number of the Australian and New Zealand Gazette which
contained the account of the catastrophe at Camden Bridge. Now, just as I was
writing, the newspaper was lying on the ground, folded in such a manner that
only two syllables of the title were visible; these two syllables were ALAND.
What a sudden light flashed on my mind. ALAND was one of the words in the
English document, one that hitherto we had translated a terre, and which must
have been the termination of the proper noun, ZEALAND.”
“Indeed!” said Glenarvan.
“Yes,” continued Paganel, with profound conviction; “this meaning had
escaped me, and do you know why? Because my wits were exercised naturally
on the French document, as it was most complete, and in that this important
word was wanting.”
“Oh, oh!” said the Major; “your imagination goes too far, Paganel; and you
forget your former deductions.”
“Go on, Major; I am ready to answer you.”
“Well, then, what do you make of your word AUSTRA?”
“What it was at first. It merely means southern countries.”
“Well, and this syllable, INDI, which was first the root of the INDIANS,
and second the root of the word indigenes?”
“Well, the third and last time,” replied Paganel, “it will be the first syllable
of the word INDIGENCE.”
“And CONTIN?” cried McNabbs. “Does that still mean CONTINENT?”
“No; since New Zealand is only an island.”
“What then?” asked Glenarvan.
“My dear lord,” replied Paganel, “I am going to translate the document
according to my third interpretation, and you shall judge. I only make two
observations beforehand. First, forget as much as possible preceding
interpretations, and divest your mind of all preconceived notions. Second,
certain parts may appear to you strained, and it is possible that I translate them
badly; but they are of no importance; among others, the word AGONIE, which
chokes me; but I cannot find any other explanation. Besides, my interpretation
was founded on the French document; and don’t forget it was written by an
Englishman, who could not be familiar with the idioms of the French
language. Now then, having said this much, I will begin.”
And slowly articulating each syllable, he repeated the following sentences:
“LE 27th JUIN, 1862, le trois-mats Britannia, de Glasgow, a sombre apres
une longue AGONIE dans les mers AUSTRALES sur les cotes de la Nouvelle
ZELANDE—in English Zealand. Deux matelots et le Capitaine Grant ont pu y
ABORDER. La CONTINUellement en PRoie a une CRUELle INDIgence, ils
ont jete ce document par—de longitude ET 37 degrees 11’ de LATItude. Venex
a leur secours, ou ils sont PERDUS!” (On the 27th of June, 1865, the threemast vessel BRITANNIA, of Glasgow, has foundered after a long AGOnie in
the Southern Seas, on the coast of New Zealand. Two sailors and Captain
Grant have succeeded in landing. Continually a prey to cruel indigence, they
have thrown this document into the sea in—longitude and 37 degrees 11’
latitude. Come to their help, or they are lost.)
Paganel stopped. His interpretation was admissible. But precisely because
it appeared as likely as the preceding, it might be as false. Glenarvan and the
Major did not then try and discuss it. However, since no traces of the
BRITANNIA had yet been met with, either on the Patagonian or Australian
coasts, at the points where these countries are crossed by the 37th parallel, the
chances were in favor of New Zealand.
“Now, Paganel,” said Glenarvan, “will you tell me why you have kept this
interpretation secret for nearly two months?”
“Because I did not wish to buoy you up again with vain hopes. Besides, we
were going to Auckland, to the very spot indicated by the latitude of the
document.”
“But since then, when we were dragged out of the route, why did you not
speak?”
“Because, however just the interpretation, it could do nothing for the
deliverance of the captain.”
“Why not, Paganel?”
“Because, admitting that the captain was wrecked on the New Zealand
coast, now that two years have passed and he has not reappeared, he must have
perished by shipwreck or by the New Zealanders.”
“Then you are of the opinion,” said Glenarvan, “that—”
“That vestiges of the wreck might be found; but that the survivors of the
BRITANNIA have, beyond doubt, perished.”
“Keep all this silent, friends,” said Glenarvan, “and let me choose a fitting
moment to communicate these sad tidings to Captain Grant’s children.”
CHAPTER XIX A CRY IN THE NIGHT
The crew soon heard that no light had been thrown on the situation of
Captain Grant by the revelations of Ayrton, and it caused profound
disappointment among them, for they had counted on the quartermaster, and
the quartermaster knew nothing which could put the DUNCAN on the right
track.
The yacht therefore continued her course. They had yet to select the island
for Ayrton’s banishment.
Paganel and John Mangles consulted the charts on board, and exactly on
the 37th parallel found a little isle marked by the name of Maria Theresa, a
sunken rock in the middle of the Pacific Ocean, 3,500 miles from the
American coast, and 1,500 miles from New Zealand. The nearest land on the
north was the Archipelago of Pomotou, under the protectorate of France; on
the south there was nothing but the eternal ice-belt of the Polar Sea. No ship
would come to reconnoiter this solitary isle. No echoes from the world would
ever reach it. The storm birds only would rest awhile on it during their long
flight, and in many charts the rock was not even marked.
If ever complete isolation was to be found on earth, it was on this little outof-the-way island. Ayrton was informed of its situation, and expressed his
willingness to live there apart from his fellows. The head of the vessel was in
consequence turned toward it immediately.
Two days later, at two o’clock, the man on watch signaled land on the
horizon. This was Maria Theresa, a low, elongated island, scarcely raised
above the waves, and looking like an enormous whale. It was still thirty miles
distant from the yacht, whose stem was rapidly cutting her way over the water
at the rate of sixteen knots an hour.
Gradually the form of the island grew more distinct on the horizon. The
orb of day sinking in the west, threw up its peculiar outlines in sharp relief. A
few peaks of no great elevation stood out here and there, tipped with sunlight.
At five o’clock John Mangles could discern a light smoke rising from it.
“Is it a volcano?” he asked of Paganel, who was gazing at this new land
through his telescope.
“I don’t know what to think,” replied the geographer; “Maria Theresa is a
spot little known; nevertheless, it would not be surprising if its origin were due
to some submarine upheaval, and consequently it may be volcanic.”
“But in that case,” said Glenarvan, “is there not reason to fear that if an
eruption produced it, an eruption may carry it away?”
“That is not possible,” replied Paganel. “We know of its existence for
several centuries, which is our security. When the Isle Julia emerged from the
Mediterranean, it did not remain long above the waves, and disappeared a few
months after its birth.”
“Very good,” said Glenarvan. “Do you think, John, we can get there tonight?”
“No, your honor, I must not risk the DUNCAN in the dark, for I am
unacquainted with the coast. I will keep under steam, but go very slowly, and
to-morrow, at daybreak, we can send off a boat.”
At eight o’clock in the evening, Maria Theresa, though five miles to
leeward, appeared only an elongated shadow, scarcely visible. The DUNCAN
was always getting nearer.
At nine o’clock, a bright glare became visible, and flames shot up through
the darkness. The light was steady and continued.
“That confirms the supposition of a volcano,” said Paganel, observing it
attentively.
“Yet,” replied John Mangles, “at this distance we ought to hear the noise
which always accompanies an eruption, and the east wind brings no sound
whatever to our ear.”
“That’s true,” said Paganel. “It is a volcano that blazes, but does not speak.
The gleam seems intermittent too, sometimes, like that of a lighthouse.”
“You are right,” said John Mangles, “and yet we are not on a lighted
coast.”
“Ah!” he exclaimed, “another fire? On the shore this time! Look! It moves!
It has changed its place!”
John was not mistaken. A fresh fire had appeared, which seemed to die out
now and then, and suddenly flare up again.
“Is the island inhabited then?” said Glenarvan.
“By savages, evidently,” replied Paganel.
“But in that case, we cannot leave the quartermaster there.”
“No,” replied the Major, “he would be too bad a gift even to bestow on
savages.”
“We must find some other uninhabited island,” said Glenarvan, who could
not help smiling at the delicacy of McNabbs. “I promised Ayrton his life, and I
mean to keep my promise.”
“At all events, don’t let us trust them,” added Paganel. “The New
Zealanders have the barbarous custom of deceiving ships by moving lights,
like the wreckers on the Cornish coast in former times. Now the natives of
Maria Theresa may have heard of this proceeding.”
“Keep her off a point,” called out John to the man at the helm. “To-morrow
at sunrise we shall know what we’re about.”
At eleven o’clock, the passengers and John Mangles retired to their cabins.
In the forepart of the yacht the man on watch was pacing the deck, while aft,
there was no one but the man at the wheel.
At this moment Mary Grant and Robert came on the poop.
The two children of the captain, leaning over the rail, gazed sadly at the
phosphorescent waves and the luminous wake of the DUNCAN. Mary was
thinking of her brother’s future, and Robert of his sister’s. Their father was
uppermost in the minds of both. Was this idolized parent still in existence?
Must they give him up? But no, for what would life be without him? What
would become of them without him? What would have become of them
already, but for Lord Glenarvan and Lady Helena?
The young boy, old above his years through trouble, divined the thoughts
that troubled his sister, and taking her hand in his own, said, “Mary, we must
never despair. Remember the lessons our father gave us. Keep your courage up
and no matter what befalls you, let us show this obstinate courage which can
rise above everything. Up to this time, sister, you have been working for me, it
is my turn now, and I will work for you.”
“Dear Robert!” replied the young girl.
“I must tell you something,” resumed Robert. “You mustn’t be vexed,
Mary!”
“Why should I be vexed, my child?”
“And you will let me do it?”
“What do you mean?” said Mary, getting uneasy.
“Sister, I am going to be a sailor!”
“You are going to leave me!” cried the young girl, pressing her brother’s
hand.
“Yes, sister; I want to be a sailor, like my father and Captain John. Mary,
dear Mary, Captain John has not lost all hope, he says. You have confidence in
his devotion to us, and so have I. He is going to make a grand sailor out of me
some day, he has promised me he will; and then we are going to look for our
father together. Tell me you are willing, sister mine. What our father would
have done for us it is our duty, mine, at least, to do for him. My life has one
purpose to which it should be entirely consecrated—that is to search, and
never cease searching for my father, who would never have given us up. Ah,
Mary, how good our father was!”
“And so noble, so generous!” added Mary. “Do you know, Robert, he was
already a glory to our country, and that he would have been numbered among
our great men if fate had not arrested his course.”
“Yes, I know it,” said Robert.
Mary put her arm around the boy, and hugged him fondly as he felt her
tears fall on his forehead.
“Mary, Mary!” he cried, “it doesn’t matter what our friends say, I still
hope, and will always hope. A man like my father doesn’t die till he has
finished his work.”
Mary Grant could not reply. Sobs choked her voice. A thousand feelings
struggled in her breast at the news that fresh attempts were about to be made
to recover Harry Grant, and that the devotion of the captain was so
unbounded.
“And does Mr. John still hope?” she asked.
“Yes,” replied Robert. “He is a brother that will never forsake us, never! I
will be a sailor, you’ll say yes, won’t you, sister? And let me join him in
looking for my father. I am sure you are willing.”
“Yes, I am willing,” said Mary. “But the separation!” she murmured.
“You will not be alone, Mary, I know that. My friend John told me so.
Lady Helena will not let you leave her. You are a woman; you can and should
accept her kindness. To refuse would be ungrateful, but a man, my father has
said a hundred times, must make his own way.”
“But what will become of our own dear home in Dundee, so full of
memories?”
“We will keep it, little sister! All that is settled, and settled so well, by our
friend John, and also by Lord Glenarvan. He is to keep you at Malcolm Castle
as if you were his daughter. My Lord told my friend John so, and he told me.
You will be at home there, and have someone to speak to about our father,
while you are waiting till John and I bring him back to you some day. Ah!
what a grand day that will be!” exclaimed Robert, his face glowing with
enthusiasm.
“My boy, my brother,” replied Mary, “how happy my father would be if he
could hear you. How much you are like him, dear Robert, like our dear, dear
father. When you grow up you’ll be just himself.”
“I hope I may,” said Robert, blushing with filial and sacred pride.
“But how shall we requite Lord and Lady Glenarvan?” said Mary Grant.
“Oh, that will not be difficult,” replied Robert, with boyish confidence.
“We will love and revere them, and we will tell them so; and we will give
them plenty of kisses, and some day, when we can get the chance, we will die
for them.”
“We’ll live for them, on the contrary,” replied the young girl, covering her
brother’s forehead with kisses. “They will like that better, and so shall I.”
The two children then relapsed into silence, gazing out into the dark night,
and giving way to long reveries, interrupted occasionally by a question or
remark from one to the other. A long swell undulated the surface of the calm
sea, and the screw turned up a luminous furrow in the darkness.
A strange and altogether supernatural incident now occurred. The brother
and sister, by some of those magnetic communications which link souls
mysteriously together, were the subjects at the same time and the same instant
of the same hallucination.
Out of the midst of these waves, with their alternations of light and
shadow, a deep plaintive voice sent up a cry, the tones of which thrilled
through every fiber of their being.
“Come! come!” were the words which fell on their ears.
They both started up and leaned over the railing, and peered into the gloom
with questioning eyes.
“Mary, you heard that? You heard that?” cried Robert.
But they saw nothing but the long shadow that stretched before them.
“Robert,” said Mary, pale with emotion, “I thought—yes, I thought as you
did, that—We must both be ill with fever, Robert.”
A second time the cry reached them, and this time the illusion was so great,
that they both exclaimed simultaneously, “My father! My father!”
It was too much for Mary. Overcome with emotion, she fell fainting into
Robert’s arms.
“Help!” shouted Robert. “My sister! my father! Help! Help!”
The man at the wheel darted forward to lift up the girl. The sailors on
watch ran to assist, and John Mangles, Lady Helena, and Glenarvan were
hastily roused from sleep.
“My sister is dying, and my father is there!” exclaimed Robert, pointing to
the waves.
They were wholly at a loss to understand him.
“Yes!” he repeated, “my father is there! I heard my father’s voice; Mary
heard it too!”
Just at this moment, Mary Grant recovering consciousness, but wandering
and excited, called out, “My father! my father is there!”
And the poor girl started up, and leaning over the side of the yacht, wanted
to throw herself into the sea.
“My Lord—Lady Helena!” she exclaimed, clasping her hands, “I tell you
my father is there! I can declare that I heard his voice come out of the waves
like a wail, as if it were a last adieu.”
The young girl went off again into convulsions and spasms, which became
so violent that she had to be carried to her cabin, where Lady Helena lavished
every care on her. Robert kept on repeating, “My father! my father is there! I
am sure of it, my Lord!”
The spectators of this painful scene saw that the captain’s children were
laboring under an hallucination. But how were they to be undeceived?
Glenarvan made an attempt, however. He took Robert’s hand, and said,
“You say you heard your father’s voice, my dear boy?”
“Yes, my Lord; there, in the middle of the waves. He cried out, ‘Come!
come!’”
“And did you recognize his voice?”
“Yes, I recognized it immediately. Yes, yes; I can swear to it! My sister
heard it, and recognized it as well. How could we both be deceived? My Lord,
do let us go to my father’s help. A boat! a boat!”
Glenarvan saw it was impossible to undeceive the poor boy, but he tried
once more by saying to the man at the wheel:
“Hawkins, you were at the wheel, were you not, when Miss Mary was so
strangely attacked?”
“Yes, your Honor,” replied Hawkins.
“And you heard nothing, and saw nothing?”
“Nothing.”
“Now Robert, see?”
“If it had been Hawkins’s father,” returned the boy, with indomitable
energy, “Hawkins would not say he had heard nothing. It was my father, my
lord! my father.”
Sobs choked his voice; he became pale and silent, and presently fell down
insensible, like his sister.
Glenarvan had him carried to his bed, where he lay in a deep swoon.
“Poor orphans,” said John Mangles. “It is a terrible trial they have to bear!”
“Yes,” said Glenarvan; “excessive grief has produced the same
hallucination in both of them, and at the same time.”
“In both of them!” muttered Paganel; “that’s strange, and pure science
would say inadmissible.”
He leaned over the side of the vessel, and listened attentively, making a
sign to the rest to keep still.
But profound silence reigned around. Paganel shouted his loudest. No
response came.
“It is strange,” repeated the geographer, going back to his cabin. “Close
sympathy in thought and grief does not suffice to explain this phenomenon.”
Next day, March 4, at 5 A. M., at dawn, the passengers, including Mary
and Robert, who would not stay behind, were all assembled on the poop, each
one eager to examine the land they had only caught a glimpse of the night
before.
The yacht was coasting along the island at the distance of about a mile, and
its smallest details could be seen by the eye.
Suddenly Robert gave a loud cry, and exclaimed he could see two men
running about and gesticulating, and a third was waving a flag.
“The Union Jack,” said John Mangles, who had caught up a spy-glass.
“True enough,” said Paganel, turning sharply round toward Robert.
“My Lord,” said Robert, trembling with emotion, “if you don’t want me to
swim to the shore, let a boat be lowered. Oh, my Lord, I implore you to let me
be the first to land.”
No one dared to speak. What! on this little isle, crossed by the 37th
parallel, there were three men, shipwrecked Englishmen! Instantaneously
everyone thought of the voice heard by Robert and Mary the preceding night.
The children were right, perhaps, in the affirmation. The sound of a voice
might have reached them, but this voice—was it their father’s? No, alas, most
assuredly no. And as they thought of the dreadful disappointment that awaited
them, they trembled lest this new trial should crush them completely. But who
could stop them from going on shore? Lord Glenarvan had not the heart to do
it.
“Lower a boat,” he called out.
Another minute and the boat was ready. The two children of Captain
Grant, Glenarvan, John Mangles, and Paganel, rushed into it, and six sailors,
who rowed so vigorously that they were presently almost close to the shore.
At ten fathoms’ distance a piercing cry broke from Mary’s lips.
“My father!” she exclaimed.
A man was standing on the beach, between two others. His tall, powerful
form, and his physiognomy, with its mingled expression of boldness and
gentleness, bore a resemblance both to Mary and Robert. This was indeed the
man the children had so often described. Their hearts had not deceived them.
This was their father, Captain Grant!
The captain had heard Mary’s cry, for he held out his arms, and fell flat on
the sand, as if struck by a thunderbolt.
CHAPTER XX CAPTAIN GRANT’S STORY
Joy does not kill, for both father and children recovered before they had
reached the yacht. The scene which followed, who can describe? Language
fails. The whole crew wept aloud at the sight of these three clasped together in
a close, silent embrace.
The moment Harry Grant came on deck, he knelt down reverently. The
pious Scotchman’s first act on touching the yacht, which to him was the soil of
his native land, was to return thanks to the God of his deliverance. Then,
turning to Lady Helena and Lord Glenarvan, and his companions, he thanked
them in broken words, for his heart was too full to speak. During the short
passage from the isle to the yacht, his children had given him a brief sketch of
the DUNCAN’S history.
What an immense debt he owed to this noble lady and her friends! From
Lord Glenarvan, down to the lowest sailor on board, how all had struggled and
suffered for him! Harry Grant expressed his gratitude with such simplicity and
nobleness, his manly face suffused with pure and sweet emotion, that the
whole crew felt amply recompensed for the trials they had undergone. Even
the impassable Major himself felt a tear steal down his cheek in spite of all his
self-command; while the good, simple Paganel cried like a child who does not
care who sees his tears.
Harry Grant could not take his eyes off his daughter. He thought her
beautiful, charming; and he not only said so to himself, but repeated it aloud,
and appealed to Lady Helena for confirmation of his opinion, as if to convince
himself that he was not blinded by his paternal affection. His boy, too, came in
for admiration. “How he has grown! he is a man!” was his delighted
exclamation. And he covered the two children so dear to him with the kisses
he had been heaping up for them during his two years of absence.
Robert then presented all his friends successively, and found means always
to vary the formula of introduction, though he had to say the same thing about
each. The fact was, each and all had been perfect in the children’s eyes.
John Mangles blushed like a child when his turn came, and his voice
trembled as he spoke to Mary’s father.
Lady Helena gave Captain Grant a narrative of the voyage, and made him
proud of his son and daughter. She told him of the young hero’s exploits, and
how the lad had already paid back part of the paternal debt to Lord Glenarvan.
John Mangles sang Mary’s praises in such terms, that Harry Grant, acting on a
hint from Lady Helena, put his daughter’s hand into that of the brave young
captain, and turning to Lord and Lady Glenarvan, said: “My Lord, and you,
Madam, also give your blessing to our children.”
When everything had been said and re-said over and over again, Glenarvan
informed Harry Grant about Ayrton. Grant confirmed the quartermaster’s
confession as far as his disembarkation on the coast of Australia was
concerned.
“He is an intelligent, intrepid man,” he added, “whose passions have led
him astray. May reflection and repentance bring him to a better mind!”
But before Ayrton was transferred, Harry Grant wished to do the honors of
his rock to his friends. He invited them to visit his wooden house, and dine
with him in Robinson Crusoe fashion.
Glenarvan and his friends accepted the invitation most willingly. Robert
and Mary were eagerly longing to see the solitary house where their father had
so often wept at the thought of them. A boat was manned, and the Captain and
his two children, Lord and Lady Glenarvan, the Major, John Mangles, and
Paganel, landed on the shores of the island.
A few hours sufficed to explore the whole domain of Harry Grant. It was in
fact the summit of a submarine mountain, a plateau composed of basaltic
rocks and volcanic DEBRIS. During the geological epochs of the earth, this
mountain had gradually emerged from the depths of the Pacific, through the
action of the subterranean fires, but for ages back the volcano had been a
peaceful mountain, and the filled-up crater, an island rising out of the liquid
plain. Then soil formed. The vegetable kingdom took possession of this new
land. Several whalers landed domestic animals there in passing; goats and
pigs, which multiplied and ran wild, and the three kingdoms of nature were
now displayed on this island, sunk in mid ocean.
When the survivors of the shipwrecked BRITANNIA took refuge there, the
hand of man began to organize the efforts of nature. In two years and a half,
Harry Grant and his two sailors had metamorphosed the island. Several acres
of well-cultivated land were stocked with vegetables of excellent quality.
The house was shaded by luxuriant gum-trees. The magnificent ocean
stretched before the windows, sparkling in the sunlight. Harry Grant had the
table placed beneath the grand trees, and all the guests seated themselves. A
hind quarter of a goat, nardou bread, several bowls of milk, two or three roots
of wild endive, and pure fresh water, composed the simple repast, worthy of
the shepherds of Arcadia.
Paganel was enchanted. His old fancies about Robinson Crusoe revived in
full force. “He is not at all to be pitied, that scoundrel, Ayrton!” he exclaimed,
enthusiastically. “This little isle is just a paradise!”
“Yes,” replied Harry Grant, “a paradise to these poor, shipwrecked fellows
that Heaven had pity on, but I am sorry that Maria Theresa was not an
extensive and fertile island, with a river instead of a stream, and a port instead
of a tiny bay exposed to the open sea.”
“And why, captain?” asked Glenarvan.
“Because I should have made it the foundation of the colony with which I
mean to dower Scotland.”
“Ah, Captain Grant, you have not given up the project, then, which made
you so popular in our old country?”
“No, my Lord, and God has only saved me through your efforts that I
might accomplish my task. My poor brothers in old Caledonia, all who are
needy must have a refuge provided for them in another land against their
misery, and my dear country must have a colony of her own, for herself alone,
somewhere in these seas, where she may find that independence and comfort
she so lacks in Europe.”
“Ah, that is very true, Captain Grant,” said Lady Helena. “This is a grand
project of yours, and worthy of a noble heart. But this little isle—”
“No, madam, it is a rock only fit at most to support a few settlers; while
what we need is a vast country, whose virgin soil abounds in untouched stores
of wealth,” replied the captain.
“Well, captain,” exclaimed Glenarvan, “the future is ours, and this country
we will seek for together.”
And the two brave Scotchmen joined hands in a hearty grip and so sealed
the compact.
A general wish was expressed to hear, while they were on the island, the
account of the shipwreck of the BRITANNIA, and of the two years spent by
the survivors in this very place. Harry Grant was delighted to gratify their
curiosity, and commenced his narration forthwith.
“My story,” he said, “is that of all the Robinson Crusoes cast upon an
island, with only God and themselves to rely on, and feeling it a duty to
struggle for life with the elements.
“It was during the night of the 26th or 27th of June, 1862, that the
BRITANNIA, disabled by a six days’ storm, struck against the rocks of Maria
Theresa. The sea was mountains high, and lifeboats were useless. My
unfortunate crew all perished, except Bob Learce and Joe Bell, who with
myself managed to reach shore after twenty unsuccessful attempts.
“The land which received us was only an uninhabited island, two miles
broad and five long, with about thirty trees in the interior, a few meadows, and
a brook of fresh water, which fortunately never dried up. Alone with my
sailors, in this corner of the globe, I did not despair. I put my trust in God, and
accustomed myself to struggle resolutely for existence. Bob and Joe, my brave
companions in misfortune, my friends, seconded me energetically.
“We began like the fictitious Robinson Crusoe of Defoe, our model, by
collecting the planks of the ship, the tools, a little powder, and firearms, and a
bag of precious seeds. The first few days were painful enough, but hunting and
fishing soon afforded us a sure supply of food, for wild goats were in
abundance in the interior of the island, and marine animals abounded on the
coast. By degrees we fell into regular ways and habits of life.
“I had saved my instruments from the wreck, and knew exactly the
position of the island. I found we were out of the route of vessels, and could
not be rescued unless by some providential chance. I accepted our trying lot
composedly, always thinking, however, of my dear ones, remembering them
every day in my prayers, though never hoping to see them again.
“However, we toiled on resolutely, and before long several acres of land
were sown with the seed off the BRITANNIA; potatoes, endive, sorrel, and
other vegetables besides, gave wholesome variety to our daily fare. We caught
some young kids, which soon grew quite tame. We had milk and butter. The
nardou, which grew abundantly in dried up creeks, supplied us with tolerably
substantial bread, and we had no longer any fears for our material life.
“We had built a log hut with the DEBRIS of the BRITANNIA, and this
was covered over with sail cloth, carefully tarred over, and beneath this secure
shelter the rainy season passed comfortably. Many a plan was discussed here,
and many a dream indulged in, the brightest of which is this day realized.
“I had at first the idea of trying to brave the perils of the ocean in a canoe
made out of the spars of the ship, but 1,500 miles lay between us and the
nearest coast, that is to say the islands of the Archipelago of Pomotou. No boat
could have stood so long a voyage. I therefore relinquished my scheme, and
looked for no deliverance except from a divine hand.
“Ah, my poor children! how often we have stood on the top of the rocks
and watched the few vessels passing in the distance far out at sea. During the
whole period of our exile only two or three vessels appeared on the horizon,
and those only to disappear again immediately. Two years and a half were
spent in this manner. We gave up hoping, but yet did not despair. At last, early
yesterday morning, when I was standing on the highest peak of the island, I
noticed a light smoke rising in the west. It increased, and soon a ship appeared
in sight. It seemed to be coming toward us. But would it not rather steer clear
of an island where there was no harbor.
“Ah, what a day of agony that was! My heart was almost bursting. My
comrades kindled a fire on one of the peaks. Night came on, but no signal
came from the yacht. Deliverance was there, however. Were we to see it
vanish from our eyes?
“I hesitated no longer. The darkness was growing deeper. The ship might
double the island during the night. I jumped into the sea, and attempted to
make my way toward it. Hope trebled my strength, I cleft the waves with
superhuman vigor, and had got so near the yacht that I was scarcely thirty
fathoms off, when it tacked about.
“This provoked me to the despairing cry, which only my two children
heard. It was no illusion.
“Then I came back to the shore, exhausted and overcome with emotion and
fatigue. My two sailors received me half dead. It was a horrible night this last
we spent on the island, and we believed ourselves abandoned forever, when
day dawned, and there was the yacht sailing nearly alongside, under easy
steam. Your boat was lowered—we were saved—and, oh, wonder of Divine
goodness, my children, my beloved children, were there holding out their arms
to me!”
Robert and Mary almost smothered their father with kisses and caresses as
he ended his narrative.
It was now for the first time that the captain heard that he owed his
deliverance to the somewhat hieroglyphical document which he had placed in
a bottle and confined to the mercy of the ocean.
But what were Jacques Paganel’s thoughts during Captain Grant’s recital?
The worthy geographer was turning over in his brain for the thousandth time
the words of the document. He pondered his three successive interpretations,
all of which had proved false. How had this island, called Maria Theresa, been
indicated in the papers originally?
At last Paganel could contain himself no longer, and seizing Harry Grant’s
hand, he exclaimed:
“Captain! will you tell me at last what really was in your indecipherable
document?”
A general curiosity was excited by this question of the geographer, for the
enigma which had been for nine months a mystery was about to be explained.
“Well, captain,” repeated Paganel, “do you remember the precise words of
the document?”
“Exactly,” replied Harry Grant; “and not a day has passed without my
recalling to memory words with which our last hopes were linked.”
“And what are they, captain?” asked Glenarvan. “Speak, for our amour
propre is wounded to the quick!”
“I am ready to satisfy you,” replied Harry Grant; “but, you know, to
multiply the chances of safety, I had inclosed three documents in the bottle, in
three different languages. Which is it you wish to hear?”
“They are not identical, then?” cried Paganel.
“Yes, they are, almost to a word.”
“Well, then, let us have the French document,” replied Glenarvan. “That is
the one that is most respected by the waves, and the one on which our
interpretations have been mostly founded.”
“My Lord, I will give it you word for word,” replied Harry Grant.
“LE 27 JUIN, 1862, le trois-mats Britannia, de Glasgow, s’est perdu a
quinze cents lieues de la Patagonie, dans l’hemisphere austral. Partes a terre,
deux matelots et le Capitaine Grant ont atteint l’ile Tabor—”
“Oh!” exclaimed Paganel.
“LA,” continued Harry Grant, “continuellement en proie a une cruelle
indigence, ils ont jete ce document par 153 degrees de longitude et 37 degrees
11’ de latitude. Venes a leur secours, ou ils sont perdus.”
At the name of Tabor, Paganel had started up hastily, and now being unable
to restrain himself longer, he called out:
“How can it be Isle Tabor? Why, this is Maria Theresa!”
“Undoubtedly, Monsieur Paganel,” replied Harry Grant. “It is Maria
Theresa on the English and German charts, but is named Tabor on the French
ones!”
At this moment a vigorous thump on Paganel’s shoulder almost bent him
double. Truth obliges us to say it was the Major that dealt the blow, though
strangely contrary to his usual strict politeness.
“Geographer!” said McNabbs, in a tone of the most supreme contempt.
But Paganel had not even felt the Major’s hand. What was that compared
to the geographical blow which had stunned him?
He had been gradually getting nearer the truth, however, as he learned
from Captain Grant. He had almost entirely deciphered the indecipherable
document. The names Patagonia, Australia, New Zealand, had appeared to
him in turn with absolute certainty. CONTIN, at first CONTINENT, had
gradually reached its true meaning, continuelle. Indi had successively signified
indiens, indigenes, and at last the right word was found—INDIGENCE. But
one mutilated word, ABOR, had baffled the geographer’s sagacity. Paganel
had persisted in making it the root of the verb ABORDER, and it turned out to
be a proper name, the French name of the Isle Tabor, the isle which had been a
refuge for the shipwrecked sailors of the BRITANNIA. It was difficult to
avoid falling into the error, however, for on the English planispheres on the
DUNCAN, the little isle was marked Maria Theresa.
“No matter?” cried Paganel, tearing his hair; “I ought not to have forgotten
its double appellation. It is an unpardonable mistake, one unworthy of a
secretary of the Geographical Society. I am disgraced!”
“Come, come, Monsieur Paganel,” said Lady Helena; “moderate your
grief.”
“No, madam, no; I am a mere ass!”
“And not even a learned one!” added the Major, by way of consolation.
When the meal was over, Harry Grant put everything in order in his house.
He took nothing away, wishing the guilty to inherit the riches of the innocent.
Then they returned to the vessel, and, as Glenarvan had determined to start the
same day, he gave immediate orders for the disembarkation of the
quartermaster. Ayrton was brought up on the poop, and found himself face to
face with Harry Grant.
“It is I, Ayrton!” said Grant
“Yes, it is you, captain,” replied Ayrton, without the least sign of surprise
at Harry Grant’s recovery. “Well, I am not sorry to see you again in good
health.”
“It seems, Ayrton, that I made a mistake in landing you on an inhabited
coast.”
“It seems so, captain.”
“You are going to take my place on this uninhabited island. May Heaven
give you repentance!”
“Amen,” said Ayrton, calmly.
Glenarvan then addressed the quartermaster.
“It is still your wish, then, Ayrton, to be left behind?”
“Yes, my Lord!”
“And Isle Tabor meets your wishes?”
“Perfectly.”
“Now then, listen to my last words, Ayrton. You will be cut off here from
all the world, and no communication with your fellows is possible. Miracles
are rare, and you will not be able to quit this isle. You will be alone, with no
eye upon you but that of God, who reads the deepest secrets of the heart; but
you will be neither lost nor forsaken, as Captain Grant was. Unworthy as you
are of anyone’s remembrance, you will not be dropped out of recollection. I
know where you are, Ayrton; I know where to find you—I shall never forget.”
“God keep your Honor,” was all Ayrton’s reply.
These were the final words exchanged between Glenarvan and the
quartermaster. The boat was ready and Ayrton got into it.
John Mangles had previously conveyed to the island several cases of
preserved food, besides clothing, and tools and firearms, and a supply of
powder and shot. The quartermaster could commence a new life of honest
labor. Nothing was lacking, not even books; among others, the Bible, so dear
to English hearts.
The parting hour had come. The crew and all the passengers were
assembled on deck. More than one felt his heart swell with emotion. Mary
Grant and Lady Helena could not restrain their feelings.
“Must it be done?” said the young wife to her husband. “Must the poor
man be left there?”
“He must, Helena,” replied Lord Glenarvan. “It is in expiation of his
crimes.”
At that moment the boat, in charge of John Mangles, turned away. Ayrton,
who remained standing, and still unmoved, took off his cap and bowed
gravely.
Glenarvan uncovered, and all the crew followed his example, as if in
presence of a man who was about to die, and the boat went off in profound
silence.
On reaching land, Ayrton jumped on the sandy shore, and the boat returned
to the yacht. It was then four o’clock in the afternoon, and from the poop the
passengers could see the quartermaster gazing at the ship, standing with folded
arms on a rock, motionless as a statue.
“Shall we set sail, my Lord?” asked John Mangles.
“Yes, John,” replied Glenarvan, hastily, more moved than he cared to
show.
“Go on!” shouted John to the engineer.
The steam hissed and puffed out, the screw began to stir the waves, and by
eight o’clock the last peaks of Isle Tabor disappeared in the shadows of the
night.
CHAPTER XXI PAGANEL’S LAST ENTANGLEMENT
On the 19th of March, eleven days after leaving the island, the DUNCAN
sighted the American coast, and next day dropped anchor in the bay of
Talcahuano. They had come back again after a voyage of five months, during
which, and keeping strictly along the 37th parallel, they had gone round the
world. The passengers in this memorable expedition, unprecedented in the
annals of the Travelers’ Club, had visited Chili, the Pampas, the Argentine
Republic, the Atlantic, the island of Tristan d’Acunha, the Indian Ocean,
Amsterdam Island, Australia, New Zealand, Isle Tabor, and the Pacific. Their
search had not been fruitless, for they were bringing back the survivors of the
shipwrecked BRITANNIA.
Not one of the brave Scots who set out at the summons of their chief, but
could answer to their names; all were returning to their old Scotia.
As soon as the DUNCAN had re-provisioned, she sailed along the coast of
Patagonia, doubled Cape Horn, and made a swift run up the Atlantic Ocean.
No voyage could be more devoid of incident. The yacht was simply carrying
home a cargo of happiness. There was no secret now on board, not even John
Mangles’s attachment to Mary Grant.
Yes, there was one mystery still, which greatly excited McNabbs’s
curiosity. Why was it that Paganel remained always hermetically fastened up
in his clothes, with a big comforter round his throat and up to his very ears?
The Major was burning with desire to know the reason of this singular fashion.
But in spite of interrogations, allusions, and suspicions on the part of
McNabbs, Paganel would not unbutton.
Not even when the DUNCAN crossed the line, and the heat was so great
that the seams of the deck were melting. “He is so DISTRAIT that he thinks
he is at St. Petersburg,” said the Major, when he saw the geographer wrapped
in an immense great-coat, as if the mercury had been frozen in the
thermometer.
At last on the 9th of May, fifty-three days from the time of leaving
Talcahuano, John Mangles sighted the lights of Cape Clear. The yacht entered
St. George’s Channel, crossed the Irish Sea, and on the 10th of May reached
the Firth of Clyde. At 11 o’clock she dropped anchor off Dunbarton, and at 2
P.M. the passengers arrived at Malcolm Castle amidst the enthusiastic cheering
of the Highlanders.
As fate would have it then, Harry Grant and his two companions were
saved. John Mangles wedded Mary Grant in the old cathedral of St. Mungo,
and Mr. Paxton, the same clergyman who had prayed nine months before for
the deliverance of the father, now blessed the marriage of his daughter and his
deliverer. Robert was to become a sailor like Harry Grant and John Mangles,
and take part with them in the captain’s grand projects, under the auspices of
Lord Glenarvan.
But fate also decreed that Paganel was not to die a bachelor? Probably so.
The fact was, the learned geographer after his heroic exploits, could not
escape celebrity. His blunders made quite a FURORE among the fashionables
of Scotland, and he was overwhelmed with courtesies.
It was then that an amiable lady, about thirty years of age, in fact, a cousin
of McNabbs, a little eccentric herself, but good and still charming, fell in love
with the geographer’s oddities, and offered him her hand. Forty thousand
pounds went with it, but that was not mentioned.
Paganel was far from being insensible to the sentiments of Miss Arabella,
but yet he did not dare to speak. It was the Major who was the medium of
communication between these two souls, evidently made for each other. He
even told Paganel that his marriage was the last freak he would be able to
allow himself. Paganel was in a great state of embarrassment, but strangely
enough could not make up his mind to speak the fatal word.
“Does not Miss Arabella please you then?” asked McNabbs.
“Oh, Major, she is charming,” exclaimed Paganel, “a thousand times too
charming, and if I must tell you all, she would please me better if she were less
so. I wish she had a defect!”
“Be easy on that score,” replied the Major, “she has, and more than one.
The most perfect woman in the world has always her quota. So, Paganel, it is
settled then, I suppose?”
“I dare not.”
“Come, now, my learned friend, what makes you hesitate?”
“I am unworthy of Miss Arabella,” was the invariable reply of the
geographer. And to this he would stick.
At last, one day being fairly driven in a corner by the intractable Major, he
ended by confiding to him, under the seal of secrecy, a certain peculiarity
which would facilitate his apprehension should the police ever be on his track.
“Bah!” said the Major.
“It is really as I tell you,” replied Paganel.
“What does it matter, my worthy friend?”
“Do you think so, Major?”
“On the contrary, it only makes you more uncommon. It adds to your
personal merits. It is the very thing to make you the nonpareil husband that
Arabella dreams about.”
And the Major with imperturbable gravity left Paganel in a state of the
utmost disquietude.
A short conversation ensued between McNabbs and Miss Arabella. A
fortnight afterwards, the marriage was celebrated in grand style in the chapel
of Malcolm Castle. Paganel looked magnificent, but closely buttoned up, and
Miss Arabella was arrayed in splendor.
And this secret of the geographer would have been forever buried in
oblivion, if the Major had not mentioned it to Glenarvan, and he could not
hide it from Lady Helena, who gave a hint to Mrs. Mangles. To make a long
story short, it got in the end to M. Olbinett’s ears, and soon became noised
abroad.
